Table	of	Contents
Title	Page
Copyright	Page
Acknowledgements
Introduction
	
Chapter	
1	-	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind:	The	Four-session	Yoga	
...
Chapter	
2	-	
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher,	[entitled]	Natural	
...
Chapter	
3	-	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
Chapter	
4	-	
The	Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through	Naked
Perception
Chapter	
5	-	
The	Spiritual	Practice	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual
Tendencies
Chapter	
6	-	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through	
...
Chapter	
7	-	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
Chapter	
8	-	
Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications	
...
Chapter	
9	-	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
Chapter	
10	-	
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through
Recollection
Chapter	
11	-	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
Chapter	
12	-	
Aspirational	Prayers
Chapter	
13	-	
A	Masked	Drama	of	Rebirth
Chapter	
14	-	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-physical
Aggregates
Appendix	One:	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	and	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
Appendix	Two:	Symbolism	of	the	Maṇḍala	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
Notes
Bibliography
Glossary	of	Key	Terms
Thematic	Index	by	Chapter
FOR	THE	BEST	IN	PAPERBACKS,	LOOK	FOR	THE

PENGUIN	CLASSICS	DELUXE	EDITION
THE	TIBETAN	BOOK	OF	THE	DEAD
The	translation	of	
The	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	was	carried	out	with	the	support
of	His	Holiness	the	Dalai	Lama	and	with	the	commentarial	guidance	of	revered
contemporary	Tibetan	masters	including	the	late	Head	of	the	Nyingma	School	of
Tibetan	Buddhism	HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche,	Zenkar	Rinpoche	and	Garje
Khamtrul	Rinpoche.
	
GYURME	DORJE	(PhD)	is	a	leading	scholar	of	the	Nyingma	tradition	of
Tibetan	 Buddhism.	 His	 seven	 major	 publications	 include	 works	 on	 Tibetan
lexicography,	medicine,	divination	and	pilgrimage	guides	to	Tibet	and	Bhutan,
as	well	as	the	translations	of	HH	Dudjom	Rinpoche’s	
The	Nyingma	School	of
Tibetan	Buddhism
.	His	forthcoming	titles	include	
The	Guhyagarbha	Tantra:
Dispelling	the	Darkness	of	the	Ten	Directions
.
	
GRAHAM	COLEMAN	is	President	of	the	Orient	Foundation	(UK),	a	major
Tibetan	 cultural	 conservancy	 organization.	 Writer/director	 of	 the	 acclaimed
feature	documentary	
Tibet:	A	Buddhist	Trilogy
	
and	editor	of	the	
Handbook	of
Tibetan	Culture
,	he	has	been	editing	Tibetan	Buddhist	poetry	and	prose	texts	in
cooperation	with	various	distinguished	translators	since	the	mid	-1970s.
	
THUPTEN	JINPA	(PhD)	is	the	senior	translator	to	His	Holiness	the	Dalai	Lama
and	 President	 of	 the	 Institute	 of	 Tibetan	 Classics.	 His	 works	 include	 the
translation	of	twelve	books	by	the	Dalai	Lama,	including	the	
New	York	Times
bestseller	
Ethics	for	the	New	Millennium
	
and	the	forthcoming	
The	Universe	in	a
Single	Atom
,	the	Dalai	Lama’s	perspective	on	the	meeting	of	Buddhism	and
modern	science.

Padmasambhava	(Guru	Rinpoche)

PENGUIN	BOOKS	
Published	by	the	Penguin	Group	
Penguin	Group	(USA)	Inc.,	375	Hudson	Street,	
New	York,	New	York	10014,	U.S.A.	
Penguin	Group	(Canada),	90	Eglinton	Avenue	East,	Suite	700,	Toronto,	Ontario,	
Canada	M4P	2Y3	(a	division	of	Pearson	Penguin	Canada	Inc.)	
Penguin	Books	Ltd,	80	Strand,	London	WC2R	0RL,	England	
Penguin	Ireland,	25	St	Stephen’s	Green,	Dublin	2,	
Ireland	(a	division	of	Penguin	Books	Ltd)	
Penguin	Group	(Australia),	250	Camberwell	Road,	Camberwell,	Victoria	3124,	
Australia	(a	division	of	Pearson	Australia	Group	Pty	Ltd)	
Penguin	Books	India	Pvt	Ltd,	11	Community	Centre,	
Panchsheel	Park,	New	Delhi	-	110	017,	India	
Penguin	Group	(NZ),	67	Apollo	Drive,	Mairangi	Bay,	Auckland	1310,	New	Zealand	
(a	division	of	Pearson	New	Zealand	Ltd)	
Penguin	Books	(South	Africa)	(Pty)	Ltd,	24	Sturdee	Avenue,	
Rosebank,	Johannesburg	2196,	South	Africa	
Penguin	Books	Ltd,	Registered	Offices:
80	Strand,	London	WC2R	0RL,	England	
First	published	in	Great	Britain	by	Penguin	Books	Ltd	2005	
First	published	in	the	United	States	of	America	by	Viking	Penguin,	
a	member	of	Penguin	Group	(USA)	Inc.	2006	
Published	in	Penguin	Books	(UK)	2006	
Published	in	Penguin	Books	(USA)	2007
	
Translation	copyright	©	The	Orient	Foundation	(UK)	and	Gyurme	Dorje,	2005	Editorial	apparatus
copyright	©	The	Orient	Foundation	(UK),	Graham	Coleman,	and	Thupten	Jinpa,	2005	Introductory
commentary	copyright	©	His	Holiness	The	Dalai	Lama,	2005

All	rights	reserved
	
Thangkas	painted	by	the	late	Shawu	Tsering	of	Repkong	and	photographed	by	Jill	Morley	Smith	are	from
the	private	collection	of	Gyurme	Dorje.
	
eISBN	:	978-1-10146228-7

CIP	data	available
	
	
	
The	scanning,	uploading	and	distribution	of	this	book	via	the	Internet	or	via	any	other	means	without	the
permission	of	the	publisher	is	illegal	and	punishable	by	law.	Please	purchase	only	authorized	electronic
editions,	and	do	not	participate	in	or	encourage	electronic	piracy	of	copyrighted	materials.	Your	support	of
the	author’s	rights	is	appreciated.
http://us.penguingroup.com

May	all	sentient	beings,	
children	of	buddha	nature,	
realise	
the	ultimate	nature	of	mind:	
insight	and	compassion,	
in	blissful	union.

Acknowledgements
Our	project	began	in	1988	when	HH	the	Dalai	Lama	kindly	offered	to	request
HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche,	the	late	head	of	the	Nyingma	school,	to	give	an
oral	commentary	to	me	on	key	sections	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
.	The
Dalai	 Lama	 knew	 that	 various	 translations	 had	 been	 made	 of	 ‘The	 Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’,	our	Chapter	11,	but	that	so	far	no	one	had	translated	the
entire	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
.	HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	graciously	agreed	to	the
Dalai	Lama’s	request	and	over	a	period	of	four	weeks	gave	the	empowerments
and	an	incisive	and	illuminating	oral	commentary	to	the	core	elements	of	the
text,	which	was	eloquently	translated	each	day	by	Sogyal	Rinpoche.
While	 in	 Kathmandu,	 receiving	 the	 oral	 commentary	 from	 HH	 Dilgo
Khyentse	Rinpoche,	I	had	the	good	fortune	to	meet	Dr	Gyurme	Dorje,	who	had
previously	translated	Longchen	Rabjampa’s	commentary	to	the	
Guhygarbha
Tantra
,	the	root	text	on	which	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	based.	During	our
first	meeting,	Gyurme	agreed	to	make	a	new	annotated	translation	of	the	entire
Tibetan	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead
,	 a	 task	 he	 undertook	 with	 exceptional	 care	 and
dedication	over	the	years	that	followed.	While	Gyurme	was	working	on	the
translation	he	was	also	employed	at	the	School	of	Oriental	and	African	Studies
in	London	as	a	research	fellow,	translating	into	English	the	
Greater	Tibetan-
Chinese	Dictionary
	
(
Bod-rgya	tshig-mdzod	chen-mo
).	During	this	time,	Gyurme
worked	closely	with	the	highly	regarded	Nyingma	master	Zenkar	Rinpoche,	who
is	one	of	the	foremost	contemporary	lineage	holders	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
.	Zenkar	Rinpoche	kindly	advised	Gyurme	throughout	the	translation	of	our
text	and	also	gave	an	extensive	oral	commentary	to	us	on	Chapter	4,	‘The
Introduction	to	Awareness’.
At	various	stages	of	the	project,	the	Dalai	Lama	answered	my	
questions	about
difficult	points,	and	he	also	dictated	to	me	the	lucid	and	succinct	Introductory
Commentary.	At	the	Dalai	Lama’s	request,	Khamtrul	Rinpoche,	an	adviser	to	the
Dalai	Lama	on	Nyingma	studies,	also	gave	a	beautiful	oral	commentary	to	key
sections	of	Chapter	8	and	dictated	the	introduction	to	Chapter	11.
Throughout	the	editing	process	I	had	the	happy	good	fortune	of	working	with
Geshe	Thupten	Jinpa,	senior	translator	to	the	Dalai	Lama,	whom	I	had	first	met
in	1977	and	who	has	been	a	close	friend	since	he	came	to	England	to	study
philosophy	at	Cambridge	in	1989.	Jinpa	translated	the	Dalai	Lama’s	Introductory

Commentary	and	reviewed	every	line	and	word	of	all	fourteen	chapters	of	the
edited	translation	with	me	twice,	in	the	course	of	which	he	made	countless
important	and	inspiring	suggestions.	Everyone	who	knows	Jinpa’s	work	is	aware
of	his	special	talent	and	skill	both	as	a	translator	and	writer	and	these	have
played	an	invaluable	role	in	this	project.	Finally,	the	individual	introductions	to
each	of	the	chapters,	except	Chapter	11,	were	written	by	Dasho	Sangay	Dorji,	a
Bhutanese	scholar,	who	comes	from	a	family	whose	paternal	line	has	been
lineage	holders	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	for	several	generations	and	who
throughout	his	childhood	accompanied	his	father	every	time	he	was	called	to	a
household	to	carry	out	these	practices.
Needless	to	say	it	has	been	a	wonderful	privilege	for	us	to	work	with	all	those
who	helped	to	make	this	project	possible.	Our	insights	and	skills	as	writers
would	not	even	register	on	the	most	sensitive	of	detectors	compared	to	those	of
the	composers	of	the	original	cycle	of	teachings	or	the	lineage	holders	who	gave
the	 commentarial	 explanation	 that	 guided	 us.	 Throughout	 this	 endeavour
therefore	we	have	tried	to	substitute	hard	work	and	attention	to	detail	for	our
lack	of	ability	and	to	let	the	original	magnificence	of	the	text	shine	through	the
clouds	of	our	shortcomings	as	much	as	we	were	able.
My	work	on	this	project	would	not	have	been	possible	without	the	life-long
friendship	of	the	Orient	Foundation’s	chairman	David	Lascelles.	It	is	difficult	to
thank	him	enough	for	all	that	he	has	made	possible,	beginning	with	our	work
together	on	the	making	of	our	films	
Tibet:	A	Buddhist	Trilogy
,	in	the	1970s,	and
ever	since.	Two	other	special	friends,	Elinore	Detiger	and	Elsie	Walker	made	it
possible	for	this	project	to	be	initiated,	and	their	kindness	and	confidence,
together	with	that	of	Michael	Baldwin,	will	never	
be	forgotten.	My	sincere
appreciation	goes	also	to	Johnnie	and	Buff	Chace,	Lucinda	Ziesing,	Faith	Bieler,
Lavinia	Currier,	Cynthia	Jurs,	Catherine	Cochran,	Margot	Wilkie,	Basil	Panzer,
Bokara	Patterson	and	Lindsay	Masters	for	their	important	contributions	in	the
early	stages	of	this	work.
At	Gyurme	Dorje’s	request,	Gene	Smith	of	the	Tibetan	Buddhist	Resource
Center	in	New	York	generously	made	available	a	digital	version	of	the	three-
volume	manuscript	from	the	library	of	the	late	
Kyabje
	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	on
which	 our	 translation	 is	 largely	 based.	 HH	 Dilgo	 Khyentse	 Rinpoche	 had
previously	provided	copies	of	the	text	reprinted	under	his	supervision	in	Delhi.
Other	versions	of	the	text	which	we	consulted,	including	the	Varanasi	reprint	and
other	versions	of	Bhutanese	and	Chinese	origin,	are	all	from	Gyurme	Dorje’s
private	collection.	Some	source	materials	were	also	kindly	provided	by	Zenkar

Rinpoche,	Tulku	Jigme	Khyentse,	Dr	Burkhard	Quessel	of	the	British	Library,
and	 Dr	 Fernand	 Meyer	 of	 CNRS	 in	 Paris.	 Gyurme	 Dorje	 also	 especially
acknowledges	the	kindness	and	profound	advice	of	all	of	his	teachers	within	the
Nyingma	 tradition,	 including	 the	 previous	 Kangyur,	 Dudjom	 and	 Dilgo
Khyentse	Rinpoches,	as	well	as	Tulku	Pema	Wangyal	and	Zenkar	Rinpoche,	and
he	thanks	his	wife	Xiaohong	for	all	her	encouragement	and	sustenance	during
the	final	years	of	this	project.
I	am	very	grateful	to	Gillon	Aitken,	my	agent,	for	introducing	this	project	to
Penguin,	our	publishers,	and	to	Simon	Winder,	our	editor	at	Penguin,	for	his
patience	and	unfailing	enthusiasm	during	the	long	genesis	of	this	work.	Our
thanks	go	also	to	Dr	Martin	Boord	and	Andrew	Bell	for	their	proofreading	of	the
text	and	to	Robert	Chilton	for	compiling	the	thematic	index.
	
GRAHAM	COLEMAN	
Bath,	England

Acknowledgements	for	the	Illustrations
The	colour	illustrations	that	appear	in	our	text	have	never	previously	been
published.	The	two	painted	scrolls	depicting	the	Hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities	in	Repkong	style,	which	were	commissioned	by	Gyurme	Dorje	in	2002,
are	from	the	studio	of	the	late	master	artist	Shawu	Tsering	of	Sengeshong
Yagotsang	in	Amdo.
The	line	drawings	of	Guru	Padmasambhava	(p.	iv)	and	Karma	Lingpa	(p.	xlvi)
are	the	work	of	Robert	Beer.	The	circular	chart	of	mantras	(
btags-grol
)	(p.	346)
is	reproduced	from	Fremantle	and	Trungpa,	
The	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
(Shambhala	Classics,	2000),	p.	32.

Introductory	Commentary
by	His	Holiness	the	XIVth	Dalai	Lama
	
	
	
The	question	of	whether	or	not	there	exists	a	continuity	of	consciousness	after
death	has	been	an	important	aspect	of	philosophical	reflection	and	debate	from
ancient	Indian	times	to	the	present.	When	considering	these	matters	from	a
Buddhist	point	of	view,	however,	we	have	to	bear	in	mind	that	the	understanding
of	the	nature	of	continuity	of	consciousness	and	the	understanding	of	the	nature
of	the	‘I’	or	‘self’	are	closely	interlinked.	Therefore,	let	us	first	look	at	what	it	is
that	can	be	said	to	constitute	a	person.
According	to	Buddhist	classical	literature,	a	person	can	be	seen	as	possessing
five	 interrelated	 aggregates,	 technically	 known	 as	 the	 five	 psycho-physical
aggregates.
a
	These	are	the	aggregate	of	consciousness,	the	aggregate	of	form
(which	includes	our	physical	body	and	senses),	the	aggregate	of	feeling,	the
aggregate	of	discrimination,	and	the	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies.	That
is	to	say,	there	is	our	body,	the	physical	world	and	our	five	senses,	and	there	are
the	 various	 processes	 of	 mental	 activity,	 our	 motivational	 tendencies,	 our
labelling	of	and	discrimination	between	objects,	our	feelings,	and	the	underlying
awareness	or	consciousness.
Among	 the	 ancient	 schools	 of	 thought,	 which	 accepted	 the	 notion	 of
continuity	 of	 consciousness,	 there	 were	 several	 non-Buddhist	 philosophical
schools	 which	 regarded	 the	 entity,	 the	 ‘I’	 or	 ‘self’,	 which	 migrated	 from
existence	to	existence	as	being	unitary	and	permanent.	They	also	suggested	that
this	‘self’	was	autonomous	in	its	relationship	to	the	psycho-physical	components
that	constitute	a	person.	In	other	words	they	believed	or	posited	that	there	is	an
essence	or	‘soul’	of	the	person,	which	exists	independently	from	the	body	and
the	mind	of	the	person.
However,	 Buddhist	 philosophy	 does	 not	 accept	 the	 existence	 of	 such	 an
independent,	autonomous	entity.	In	the	Buddhist	view,	the	self	or	the	person	is
understood	in	terms	of	a	dynamic	interdependent	relationship	of	both	mental	and
physical	 attributes,	 that	 is	 to	 say	 the	 psycho-physical	 components	 which

constitute	a	person.	In	other	words	our	sense	of	self	can,	upon	examination,	be
seen	as	a	complex	flow	of	mental	and	physical	events,	clustered	in	clearly
identifiable	patterns,	including	our	physical	features,	instincts,	emotions,	and
attitudes,	 etc.,	 continuing	 through	 time.	 Further,	 according	 to	 Prāsaṅgika-
Madhyamaka	philosophy,	which	has	become	the	prevailing	philosophical	view
of	Tibetan	Buddhism	today,	this	sense	of	self	is	simply	a	mental	construct,	a
mere	label	given	to	this	cluster	of	dependently	arising	mental	and	physical
events	in	dependence	on	their	continuity.
Now,	 when	 we	 look	 at	 this	 interdependence	 of	 mental	 and	 physical
constituents	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 Highest	 Yoga	 Tantra,
b
	
there	 are	 two
concepts	of	a	person.	One	is	the	temporary	person	or	self,	that	is	as	we	exist	at
the	moment,	and	this	is	labelled	on	the	basis	of	our	coarse	or	gross	physical	body
and	conditioned	mind,	and,	at	the	same	time,	there	is	a	subtle	person	or	self
which	is	designated	in	dependence	on	the	subtle	body	and	subtle	mind.	This
subtle	body	and	subtle	mind	are	seen	as	a	single	entity	that	has	two	facets.	The
aspect	which	has	the	quality	of	awareness,	which	can	reflect	and	has	the	power
of	cognition,	is	the	subtle	mind.	Simultaneously,	there	is	its	energy,	the	force	that
activates	the	mind	towards	its	object	-	this	is	the	subtle	body	or	subtle	wind.
These	two	inextricably	conjoined	qualities	are	regarded,	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,
as	the	ultimate	nature	of	a	person	and	are	identified	as	buddha	nature,	the
essential	or	actual	nature	of	mind.
Now,	before	we	look	more	closely	at	the	nature	of	the	subtle	body	and	mind,
let	us	look	at	how	the	gross	body	and	mind	are	thought	to	originate.	The	notion
of	dependent	origination	lies	at	the	very	heart	of	Buddhist	philosophy.	The
principle	of	dependent	origination	asserts	that	nothing	exists	in	its	own	right
independent	 of	 other	 factors.	 Things	 and	 events	 come	 into	 being	 only	 in
dependence	on	the	aggregation	of	multiple	causes	and	conditions.	The	process
through	which	the	external	world	and	the	sentient	beings	
within	it	revolve	in	a
cycle	of	existence	propelled	by	karmic	propensities	and	their	interaction	with
misapprehension,	attraction	and	aversion	and	conditions	is	described	in	terms	of
twelve	 interdependent	 links.	 Each	 cycle	 of	 the	 process	 begins	 with	 a
misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	actual	reality.	This	fundamental	ignorance	acts
as	a	condition	for	the	arising	of	the	propensities	created	by	our	past	actions,
mental,	verbal	and	physical,	which	condition	our	dualising	consciousness.	Our
dualising	consciousness,	in	turn,	conditions	the	qualities	and	mode	of	interaction
of	our	psycho-physical	aggregates,	which	condition	our	sensory	fields,	which
generate	 contact,	 which	 generates	 sensations,	 and	 then	 in	 turn	 attachment,

grasping,	and	maturation	towards	rebirth.	At	this	point	there	is	an	interaction
with	the	genetic	constituents	of	the	parents	and	subsequent	interaction	with	the
environment,	and	then	finally	we	have	birth,	ageing	and	death.	This	cycle	can	be
viewed	as	both	illustrating	the	underlying	processes	of	life,	death	and	rebirth	and
as	an	illustration	of	the	processes	to	be	transformed	on	the	path	to	liberation
from	suffering	in	cyclic	existence.
The	notion	that	there	is	a	connection	between	this	life	and	the	events	of	both
our	previous	existence	and	our	future	existence,	follows	from	the	Buddhist
understanding	of	the	natural	law	of	cause	and	effect.	For	example,	although	we
can	speak	of	yesterday’s	weather	and	today’s	weather	as	distinct,	today’s	weather
is	inextricably	linked	with	the	weather	patterns	of	yesterday.	Even	at	the	bodily
level,	in	the	case	of	our	physical	health	for	example,	we	know	that	events	in	the
past	affect	the	present	and	those	of	the	present	the	future.	Similarly,	in	the	realm
of	 consciousness	 the	 Buddhist	 view	 is	 that	 there	 is	 also	 this	 same	 causal
continuum	between	the	events	of	the	past,	present	and	future.
The	 Buddhist	 understanding	 of	 the	 continuity	 of	 personal	 experience,
including	our	memories,	can	also	be	considered	here.	The	Buddhist	view	is	that
the	continuity	of	personal	experience	is	primarily	founded	on	the	capacity	for
retention,	which	can	be	further	developed	during	one’s	meditative	practice	in	this
life.	However,	generally	speaking,	it	is	thought	that	if	a	person	dies	after	a
prolonged	period	of	illness	that	has	led	to	a	prolonged	degeneration	of	both
physical	and	mental	capacities,	there	will	be	a	greater	chance	of	many	of	the
personal	characteristics,	including	memories	etc.,	being	lost.	On	the	other	hand,
in	 the	 case	 of	 someone	 who	 dies	 a	 sudden	 death,	 when	 the	 mind-body
relationship	at	the	gross	
level	is	still	very	firm,	it	is	thought	that	there	is	a	greater
chance	 of	 carrying	 forward	 the	 acquired	 characteristics	 and	 memories,	
etc.
Nonetheless,	in	both	cases,	the	characteristics	carried	forward	from	a	previous
life	are	generally	thought	to	be	most	strongly	felt	at	an	early	stage	of	one’s
rebirth.	This	is	because	the	personal	characteristics	of	the	previous	life	are
thought,	 generally	 speaking,	 to	 be	 quickly	 overwhelmed	 by	 the	 developing
characteristics	inherited	from	the	parents	of	the	present	life.	Nonetheless,	as	I
have	mentioned,	much	depends	in	this	respect	on	the	individual’s	capacity	for
recall	and	this	capacity	for	recall	is	dependent	on	a	deepened	retentive	training
acquired	in	this	lifetime.
Now,	let	us	look	at	the	possible	states	of	existence	one	can	be	born	into.	From
the	Buddhist	perspective,	rebirth	in	conditioned	existence	can	take	place	in	one
of	three	realms:	the	formless	realm,	the	form	realm	or	the	desire	realm.	The	form

and	formless	realms	are	fruits	of	subtle	states	of	consciousness,	attained	upon	the
realisation	of	certain	meditative	concentrations.	Our	realm,	the	desire	realm,	is
the	most	gross	of	these	three.	Six	classes	of	beings	are	described	as	inhabiting
the	desire	realm:	gods	(mundane	celestial	beings	whose	primary	mental	state	is
exaltation),	antigods	(who	are	predominantly	hostile	and	jealous),	human	beings
(who	are	influenced	by	all	the	five	dissonant	mental	states),	animals	(who	are
under	the	sway	of	delusion),	anguished	spirits	(who	are	under	the	sway	of
attachment	and	unsatisfied	craving)	and	hell	beings	(who	are	overwhelmed	by
hatred,	anger	and	fear).	In	the	literature	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	the	evolution	of
all	the	three	realms	of	conditioned	existence	are	described	in	terms	of	differing
expressions	or	states	of	energy	and,	as	I	have	mentioned,	it	is	said	that	our
fundamental	ignorance	is	the	root	of	conditioned	existence	and	that	karmic
energy	is	its	activating	force.	In	the	Buddhist	view,	therefore,	it	is	the	nature	of
our	habitual	tendencies	that	generates	our	future	existence,	driven	by	the	natural
law	of	cause	and	effect.
Further,	when	we	observe	the	patterns	of	arising	and	subsiding	that	underlie
the	dynamic	nature	of	the	physical	environment,	the	cycle	of	days	and	nights	and
the	passing	of	the	seasons,	for	example,	and	we	observe	how	matter	arises	from
insubstantial	 subatomic	 particles	 and	 we	 look	 at	 the	 patterns	 of	 causal
connectedness	in	the	arising	and	dissolution	of	our	mental	experiences	from
moment	to	moment,	across	the	differing	phases	of	deep	sleep,	dreams	and	our
waking	state,	the	notion	of	continuity	of	
consciousness	can	come	to	be	seen	to	be
in	accord	with	both	the	nature	of	our	environment	and	the	nature	of	our	mental
experience.	Certainly,	it	has	often	been	argued	that	one	advantage	of	accepting
the	notion	of	continuity	of	consciousness	is	that	it	gives	us	a	more	profound
ability	to	understand	and	to	explain	the	nature	of	our	existence	and	of	the
universe.	In	addition,	this	notion	of	continuity	and	causal	interconnectedness
reinforces	a	sense	of	consequences	for	our	own	actions,	in	terms	of	both	the
impact	on	ourselves	and	the	impact	on	others	and	the	environment.
So,	in	summary,	when	considering	the	notion	of	continuity	of	consciousness
we	must	bear	in	mind	that	there	are	many	different	levels	of	greater	or	lesser
subtlety	in	the	states	of	consciousness.	For	example,	we	know	of	course	that
certain	qualities	of	sensory	perception	are	dependent	on	the	physical	constitution
of	 the	 individual	 and	 that	 when	 the	 physical	 body	 dies,	 the	 states	 of
consciousness	 associated	 with	 these	 sensory	 perceptions	 also	 cease.	 But,
although	 we	 know	 that	 the	 human	 body	 serves	 as	 a	 condition	 for	 human
consciousness,	the	question	still	remains:	what	is	the	nature	of	the	underlying

factor	or	essence	that	accounts	for	our	experience	of	consciousness	as	having	the
natural	quality	of	luminosity	and	awareness?
Finally,	then,	when	considering	the	interrelationship	between	mind,	body	and
the	environment	at	the	subtle	level,	we	know	that	material	things	are	composed
of	cells,	atoms	and	particles	and	that	consciousness	is	composed	of	moments.
That	is	to	say	that	mind	and	matter	have	distinctly	different	natures	and	therefore
have	different	substantial	causes.	Material	things	come	into	being	based	on	other
material	entities	such	as	particles,	atoms	and	cells	and	the	mind	comes	into	being
based	on	a	previous	moment	of	mind,	which	is	something	that	is	luminous	and
has	the	capacity	to	be	aware.	Each	moment	of	awareness	therefore	depends	on	a
previous	moment	of	awareness	as	its	cause.	This	is	the	reasoning	upon	which
Buddhist	logic	asserts	that	there	is	at	the	level	of	subtle	mind	and	subtle	wind	a
beginningless	continuum	of	mind	and	matter.
It	is	through	reflection	on	the	above	themes:	the	law	of	cause	and	effect,
dependent	origination,	the	dynamics	of	our	physical	environment,	and,	based	on
our	analysis	of	the	nature	of	mind,	the	mode	of	the	arising	and	subsiding	of
thoughts,	the	shifts	in	the	modalities	of	our	consciousness	between	deep	sleep,
dreams	and	our	waking	state,	etc.,	that	the	notion	of	continuity	of	consciousness
may	first	become	established	as	relevant	to	the	understanding	of	our	current
condition.	 Once	 the	 notion	 of	 this	 continuity	 has	 been	 confirmed,	 through
reflection	and	experience,	then	it	becomes	logical	to	prepare	oneself	for	death
and	for	future	existences.
Now,	as	to	the	nature	of	the	actual	preparation	itself,	this	will	depend	on	each
individual’s	depth	of	spiritual	aspiration.	For	example,	if	an	individual	is	simply
seeking	a	favourable	rebirth	as	a	human	being,	there	is	no	need	to	engage	in	a
sophisticated	 meditative	 path	 related	 to	 the	 processes	 of	 death	 and	 rebirth.
Simply	to	live	a	virtuous	life	is	seen	as	sufficient.	Similarly,	in	the	case	of	those
who	are	seeking	personal	liberation	from	conditioned	existence	and	also	in	the
case	of	those	whose	practice	is	confined	to	the	sūtra	level	of	the	Mahāyāna	path,
their	 meditative	 preparation	 will	 be	 limited	 to	 ensuring	 the	 attainment	 of
successive	forms	of	existence	that	will	be	conducive	to	the	continuation	of	their
journey	towards	enlightenment.	For	these	three	kinds	of	individuals,	no	actual
techniques	for	utilising	the	time	of	death	as	an	essential	element	of	the	spiritual
path	have	been	set	down	in	the	classical	Buddhist	literature.	Nevertheless,	since
the	understanding	of	the	processes	of	death,	the	intermediate	state	and	rebirth	are
crucial	to	our	understanding	of	the	nature	of	existence,	we	do	find	extensive
discussion	 of	 these	 three	 processes,	 even	 in	 the	 texts	 which	 relate	 to	 the

aspirations	of	these	three	kinds	of	persons.
It	is	exclusively	in	tantra,	however,	and	particularly	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,
that	the	methods	for	utilising	the	processes	of	death,	the	intermediate	state	and
rebirth	are	specifically	taught	as	the	basis	for	achieving	liberation	from	cyclic
existence.	These	methods	involve	the	development	of	a	skilful	relationship	with
certain	experiential	stages	that	an	individual	actually	induces	with	the	intention
of	enhancing	spiritual	realisation	and	the	fruition	of	their	capacities	as	a	human
being.
Generally	speaking,	the	practices	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	present	a	spiritual
path	which	enables	the	individual	to	attain	complete	buddhahood	within	a	single
lifetime,	prior	to	the	moment	of	death.	Yet,	for	those	who	are	unable	to	achieve
this,	it	becomes	crucial	to	use	the	transformative	opportunities	offered	by	the
naturally	occurring	processes	of	death,	the	intermediate	state	and	rebirth.	Hence,
in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	it	is	not	merely	the	preparation	for	a	more	developed
future	rebirth	which	is	important,	but	of	
more	fundamental	significance	is	the
personal	preparation	for	using	one’s	own	death	and	subsequent	states	as	a	means
of	achieving	liberation.
In	the	literature	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	as	I	have	mentioned,	the	three	realms
of	conditioned	existence	into	which	a	human	being	may	be	born	are	described	in
terms	of	differing	expressions	or	modalities	of	energy	(
rlung
)	and	it	is	said	that
our	fundamental	ignorance	is	the	root	of	conditioned	existence	and	that	karmic
energy	is	its	activating	force.	Further,	from	the	tantric	perspective,	death,	the
intermediate	 state	 and	 rebirth	 are	 also	 seen	 as	 nothing	 other	 than	 differing
modalities	of	karmic	energy.	The	point	at	which	the	gross	levels	of	energy	are
completely	dissolved	and	only	the	subtle	energies	remain	is	death.	The	stage	at
which	these	energies	unfold	into	a	more	manifest	form	is	the	intermediate	state,
and	the	stage	at	which	they	eventually	manifest	substantially	is	called	rebirth.
Thus,	all	three	states	are	differing	manifestations	of	energy	(
rlung
).	Based	on	this
understanding,	since	death	is	the	state	when	all	the	gross	levels	of	energy	and
consciousness	 have	 been	 dissolved,	 and	 only	 the	 subtle	 energies	 and
consciousnesses	remain,	it	is	possible	for	an	advanced	yogin	to	meditatively
induce	a	state	which	is	almost	identical	to	the	actual	experience	of	death.	This
can	be	achieved	because	it	is	possible	to	meditatively	bring	about	the	dissolution
of	 the	 gross	 levels	 of	 energy	 and	 consciousness.	 When	 such	 a	 task	 is
accomplished,	the	meditator	gains	an	enormous	potential	to	progress	definitively
in	 his	 or	 her	 spiritual	 practice.	 For	 at	 the	 stage,	 when	 the	 experience	 of
fundamental	inner	radiance	is	genuinely	effected	through	such	a	method,	the

yogin	gains	the	capacity	to	actualise	the	illusory	body	of	the	meditational	deity	-
thus	ensuring	the	realisation	of	perfect	buddhahood	in	this	lifetime.
This	achievement	of	perfect	buddhahood	entails	the	actualisation	of	the	three
dimensions	or	bodies	of	a	buddha	(
trikāya
).	These	fruitional	bodies	are	related
both	 to	 our	 ultimate	 natural	 state	 and	 to	 the	 emanational	 qualities	 of	 full
enlightenment.	Interestingly,	we	see	exactly	the	same	pattern	of	dimensions	in
our	ordinary	existence.	Death	is	the	point	at	which	both	the	physical	and	mental
fields	dissolve	into	inner	radiance	and	where	both	consciousness	and	energy
exist	at	their	most	subtle	non-dual	level,	as	in	deep	sleep.	This	mode	in	its
fruitional	state	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	(
dharmakāya
).	Then,	from	within
this	essential	or	
natural	state,	one	enters	into	the	intermediate	state,	where,
although	 there	 is	 perceptual	 experience,	 the	 phenomenal	 forms	 are
comparatively	 subtle	 and	 non-substantive,	 as	 in	 a	 dream.	 This	 mode	 in	 its
fruitional	state	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	(
sambhogakāya
).	Then,
from	this	state,	one	assumes	a	grosser	physical	existence	culminating	in	actual
rebirth,	as	in	our	normal	waking	experience.	This	mode	in	its	fruitional	state	is
the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	(
nirmāṇakāya
).	Thus,	we	see	a	direct	parallel
between	the	three	natural	states	of	our	existence	and	the	three	dimensions	of	a
fully	enlightened	being.
Now,	since	actualisation	of	these	three	dimensions	can	be	effected	through	the
transformation	of	the	three	ordinary	states	of	our	existence,	we	find	an	array	of
practices	 which	 contain	 specific	 meditative	 techniques	 focusing	 on	 those
attributes	which	the	three	ordinary	states	of	existence	and	the	three	buddha-
bodies	have	in	common.	Through	these	practices	a	continuity	is	developed
between	the	ground	or	base	(the	ordinary	state),	the	path,	and	the	fruition	(the
buddha-bodies).	In	order	to	highlight	the	potential	for	liberation	which	exists	in
the	skilful	transformation	of	the	ordinary	states	of	existence,	the	great	Indian
Buddhist	master	Nāgārjuna	uses	the	term	‘
kāya
’	even	when	describing	the	three
ordinary	states.	Thus,	the	dimension	(
kāya
)	of	the	moment	of	death	is	equated
with	the	basic	
dharmakāya
,	the	dimension	(
kāya
)	of	the	intermediate	state	with
the	basic	
sambhogakāya
	and	the	dimension	(
kāya
)	of	the	rebirth	process	with	the
basic	
nirmāṇakāya
	
.
c
	Thus,	it	is	said,	that	through	the	meditative	ability	of	an
accomplished	yogin,	a	genuine	assimilation	takes	place	at	the	actual	moment	of
death,	upon	entering	the	intermediate	state	and	upon	beginning	the	process	of
rebirth.
With	respect	to	training	in	these	practices,	a	similitude	of	such	an	assimilation
can	be	effected	during	the	waking	state,	through	generation	stage	practices,	and

during	sleep,	through	dream	yoga	practices.
In	tantra	the	practice	of	imaginatively	generating	the	meditational	deity,	that	is
to	say,	the	practice	of	tantra’s	generation	stage,	is	a	unique	path	by	which	the
three	fruitional	dimensions	or	buddha-bodies	are	brought	into	the	path	of	one’s
practice.	It	is	through	understanding	the	profundity	of	this	method	that	the	tantric
approach	can	be	fully	appreciated.	The	process	of	generating	oneself	as	the
meditational	deity	is	the	means	by	which	the	indivisible	union	of	the	realisation
of	emptiness	and	the	realisation	of	perfect	awareness	is	brought	to	fruition.	This
accomplishment	directly	counteracts	the	ordinary	perceptions	and	apprehensions
which	underlie	our	ordinary	dualistic	experience.	It	is	this	accomplishment	that
culminates	in	the	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind,	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	the	state	beyond	ordinary	thought,	where	there	is	no	longer	any	trace	of
the	misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	reality,	of	attachment	or	of	aversion	-	only
pure	radiant	awareness.
The	practice	of	generating	oneself	as	the	meditational	deity	is	found	in	all	four
classes	of	tantra.	However,	these	methods	are	taught	in	their	most	sophisticated
forms	in	the	class	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra.	Depending	on	the	spiritual	capacities
of	 the	 practitioner	 the	 tantras	 describe	 a	 graduated	 series	 of	 methods	 for
generating	oneself	as	the	meditational	deity.	In	the	New	Translation	schools
there	 is	 a	 systematisation	 according	 to	 four	 levels	 of	 capacity	 and	 in	 the
Nyingma	(or	Old	Translation)	school	the	highest	level	of	practice	is	further
subdivided	into	three	methods:	Mahāyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Atiyoga.
In	the	primary	stages	of	tantric	practice,	in	order	to	train	oneself	in	the
actualisation	of	the	three	buddha-bodies,	as	I	have	mentioned,	the	yogin	first
engages	in	the	practices	of	the	generation	stage	of	meditation.	The	generation
stage	 is	 like	 an	 imaginary	 rehearsal	 of	 the	 actual	 processes.	 Then,	 in	 the
perfection	stage	of	meditation,	however,	the	experiences	of	entering	the	Buddha-
body	of	Reality	and	actualising	its	emanational	states,	the	Buddha-body	of
Perfect	Resource	and	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,	are	not	imagined	but	real,
and	even	involve	certain	physiological	changes	occurring	in	the	yogin’s	body.
Crucial	to	all	these	practices	is	the	process	of	the	dissolution	of	the	gross
consciousnesses	and	energies	of	the	practitioner.	Here,	the	practice	of	Highest
Yoga	Tantra	underlines	the	importance	of	interrupting	or	cutting	off	the	gross
energy	 which	 serves	 as	 a	 vehicle	 for	 conceptual	 elaborations.	
Thereby,
hypothetically	speaking,	if	the	individual	succeeds	in	interrupting	the	flow	of
karmic	energy,	then,	even	if	the	propensities	for	fundamental	ignorance	remain,
they	will	be	rendered	impotent.

As	I	have	noted	above,	if	we	observe	carefully,	we	can	see	a	basic	pattern	of
emergence	and	dissolution	which	is	common	to	both	animate	and	inanimate
phenomena.	Among	inanimate	phenomena	the	processes	of	arising	start	from	the
very	subtle	and	develop	into	the	more	gross.	That	is:	there	is	an	emergence	from
empty	space,	and	a	progression	to	movement	or	energy,	to	heat	or	light,	to
moisture	or	liquidity,	and	finally	to	solidity.	The	dissolution	is	the	reverse	of	this
sequence.	This	process	of	arising	and	dissolution	also	occurs	in	the	body.	In
tantra,	the	process	of	dissolution	of	the	physical	elements	which	constitute	a
human	body	is	described	as	beginning	first	with	the	dissolution	of	the	earth
element,	followed	by	the	water	element,	the	fire	element,	the	wind	element	and,
finally,	at	the	point	at	which	only	the	space	element	is	prominent,	all	the	gross
levels	of	energy	and	consciousness	have	dissolved.	Then,	in	a	further	series	of
dissolutions,	this	stage	gives	rise	to	the	experiences	which	are	called:	‘whitish
appearance’,	 followed	 by	 ‘reddish	 increased	 appearance’,	 ‘blackish	 near
attainment’	and	finally	there	is	a	culmination	in	the	full	experience	of	inner
radiance	called	‘the	attainment’.
d
Because	the	stages	of	dissolution	are	natural	processes,	imagining	these	is	of
pre-eminent	 importance	 in	 the	 generation-stage	 practices	 of	 visualising	 the
meditational	deity.
Both	 in	 the	 New	 and	 Old	 Translation	 schools,	 the	 actualisation	 of	 inner
radiance,	the	point	at	which	all	our	gross	consciousnesses	and	energies	have
been	dissolved,	is	the	primary	intent.	This	is	the	essence	of	the	Great	Perfection
(Dzogchen)	practices
e
	of	the	Nyingma	tradition,	of	the	Union	of	Emptiness	and
Luminosity	Based	on	the	Sameness	of	Saṃsāra	and	Nirvāṇa	practices	of	the
Sakya	tradition,	of	the	Great	Seal	(
Mahāmudrā
)	practices	of	the	Kagyu	tradition
and	 the	 Indivisible	 Union	 of	 Bliss	 and	 Emptiness	 practices	 of	 the	 Gelug
tradition.
Now,	when	we	speak	of	inner	radiance,	it	is	important	to	bear	in	mind	that
there	are	different	levels	at	which	this	can	be	experienced	
and,	in	addition,	there
is	one	important	difference	between	the	Dzogchen	view	of	inner	radiance	and
that	of	the	New	Translation	schools.	As	with	that	of	emptiness,	the	experience	of
inner	 radiance	 can	 be	 of	 different	 types.	 The	 experience	 of	 inner	 radiance
described	in	the	New	Translation	schools	is	effected	only	subsequent	to	the
dissolution	of	all	the	gross	levels	of	conceptual	elaboration.	However,	in	the
Dzogchen	view,	all	states	of	awareness	or	consciousness	are	thought	to	be
pervaded	by	inner	radiance,	just	as	a	sesame	seed	is	permeated	by	oil.	Therefore,

in	Dzogchen,	there	exist	refined	instructions	which	allow	the	recognition	of
inner	radiance	even	while	all	the	gross	levels	of	sensory	activity	are	still	active.
This	is	where	we	come	to	the	important	distinction	made	in	the	Dzogchen
teachings	between	the	Tibetan	terms	‘
sems
’	and	‘
rig-pa
’.	Our	‘ordinary	mind’
(
sems
)	refers	to	the	gross	dualising	consciousness	(
rnam-shes
),	whereas	‘pure
awareness’	(
rig-pa
)	is	free	from	the	dualistic	perceptions	of	subject	and	object.
Following	the	practices	of	the	Dzogchen	teachings	of	the	Nyingma	school	the
student	is	directly	introduced	by	an	authentic	spiritual	teacher	to	the	very	nature
of	his	or	her	mind	as	pure	awareness.	This	is	the	focus	of	the	‘Cutting	through
Resistance’	(
khregs-chod
)	aspect	of	the	Dzogchen	path	and	this	is	complemented
by	the	All-surpassing	Realisation	(
thod-rgal
)	practices	which	focus	on	eliciting
and	 recognising	 the	 radiances	 of	 pristine	 cognition.
f
	 Irrespective	 of	 these
differences	 of	 view	 and	 practice,	 however,	 a	 genuine	 experience	 of	 inner
radiance	is	the	realisation	of	the	fundamental	nature	of	our	awareness,	which	is
the	inextricable	union	of	emptiness	and	luminosity.
Now,	when	the	subtle	mind	is	completely	pure,	the	body	or	energy	aspect	of
the	combination	of	subtle	mind	and	subtle	body	arises	as	the	five	different
coloured	luminosities	(white,	blue,	red,	yellow	and	green)	and	in	the	form	of
buddha-bodies.	 All	 the	 different	 maṇḍalas,	 of	 the	 hundred	 deities,	 or	 the
thousand	deities,	or	whatever	number,	are	all	expressions	of	the	five	enlightened
families,	which	are	related	to	the	purity	of	the	five	psycho-physical	aggregates,
the	five	elements	and	the	five	pristine	cognitions.	These	
relationships	form	the
core	of	the	practices	presented	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra,	as	does	the	experiential
cultivation	of	the	nature	of	these	deities	through	the	daily	practice.
So,	 in	 summary,	 by	 following	 in	 our	 practice	 the	 process	 of	 the	 natural
dissolution	of	our	gross	forms	of	consciousness,	and	the	natural	arising	from	this
state	of	the	luminosities	and	bodies	of	the	deities,	first	the	actualisation	of	inner
radiance	is	refined	and	this	serves	as	the	substantive	cause	for	the	arising	of	the
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource	 and	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation
respectively.	Thus	the	three	bodies	of	a	buddha	are	perfected,	which	is	the
fruition	of	the	path	of	tantra.
Now,	as	for	the	forms	of	the	meditational	deity,	which	are	generated	in	the
practice	of	tantra,	there	are	two	principal	types:	peaceful	deities	and	wrathful
deities.	In	general	terms,	these	are	concerned	with	the	transformation	of	the
cognitive	 and	 emotional	 states	 associated	 with	 attachment	 and	 aversion
respectively.	The	peaceful	deities	are	quiescent	and	are	expressions	of	the	natural
purity	of	attraction,	that	is	the	mind	resting	in	its	natural	pristine	state.	The

wrathful	 deities	 are	 the	 dynamic	 aspect	 of	 the	 peaceful	 deities	 and	 are
expressions	of	the	natural	transformation	of	aversion.	That	is	they	represent	the
mind’s	active	transformation	of	delusion	into	pristine	cognition.
g
As	we	now	see,	the	path	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	involves	taking	dissonant
cognitive	states,	such	as	attachment	and	aversion,	on	to	the	path.	In	the	path
followed	 by	 pious	 attendants	 (
śrāvaka
)	 dissonant	 cognitive	 states	 are
categorically	perceived	as	something	to	be	renounced.	In	the	Mahāyāna	path,
however,	 there	 are	 two	 approaches	 which	 contrast	 with	 that	 of	 the	 pious
attendants.	According	to	the	Mahāyāna	sūtras,	if	a	certain	situation	suggests	a
positive	outcome	in	terms	of	benefiting	others	the	voluntary	use	of	desire	or
attachment	is	allowable.	However,	in	the	tantras	it	is	not	merely	that	desire	or
attachment	is	permissible	when	beneficial,	here	one	deliberately	utilises	their
energies	as	the	path	to	purifying	or	consuming	the	dissonant	states	themselves.
Given	that	the	practices	of	the	tantras	include	the	disciplined	engagement	of
subtle	physiological	processes	and	the	transformation	
of	the	energies	associated
with	attraction	and	aversion,	before	a	practitioner	can	embark	on	the	practices	of
tantra,	he	or	she	must	find	a	spiritual	teacher	who	meets	the	qualifications	as	set
out	in	the	authoritative	literature	and	must	receive	empowerments	and	graduated
instruction	from	that	master.	In	addition,	the	practitioner	should	complete	the
preliminary	practices	and	achieve	a	thorough	grounding	in	the	foundational
paths	of	the	sūtras,	which	includes	the	development	of	the	altruistic	intention	to
attain	 enlightenment	 (
bodhicitta
),	 the	 development	 of	 calm	 abiding	 -	 the
stabilisation	 of	 attention	 on	 an	 internal	 object	 of	 meditation	 -	 and	 the
development	of	penetrative	insight	-	an	analytical	meditative	state	that	dissects
the	 nature	 of	 its	 object,	 its	 relationships,	 characteristics	 and	 function.	 The
development	of	calm	abiding	and	penetrative	insight	are	the	means	by	which	the
practitioner	can	cultivate	his	or	her	understanding	of	emptiness,	which	is	an
appreciation	of	the	total	absence	of	inherent	existence	and	self-identity	with
respect	to	all	phenomena.	It	is	an	essential	prerequisite	for	beginning	on	the	path
of	tantra	that	the	practitioner	achieve	a	profound	appreciation	of	both	non-
substantiality	and	its	interdependent	relationship	with	phenomenal	reality.	The
tantras	presuppose	this	understanding,	so	it	is	in	the	sūtras	therefore	that	we	find
the	 extensive	 elucidation	 of	 the	 methods	 for	 developing	 a	 complete
understanding	of	emptiness.
Now,	as	to	the	nature	of	the	understanding	of	emptiness	presupposed	by	the
tantras,	 the	 majority	 of	 masters	 of	 the	 Nyingma,	 Kagyu,	 Sakya	 and	 Gelug
schools	agree	that	this	is	the	view	of	the	Middle	Way	(
madhyamapratipad
)

propounded	in	the	sūtras	and	elucidated	by	Nāgārjuna	in	his	works.	In	the
Dzogchen	view,	however,	there	is	also	a	unique	method	of	explaining	emptiness,
which	 emphasises	 the	 inseparability	 of	 emptiness	 and	 inner	 radiance,	 but
nonetheless,	principally,	this	designation	does	refer	to	emptiness	as	presented	in
Nāgārjuna’s	Middle	Way.
As	 far	 as	 the	 concept	 of	 emptiness	 or	 the	 ultimate	 nature	 of	 reality	 is
concerned	this	is	one	area	where	there	is	an	emerging	convergence	between	the
Buddhist	understanding	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	existence	and	the	evolving
contemporary	scientific	view.	This	convergence	relates	to	the	unfindability	of
entities	when	these	are	analytically	sought.	In	modern	science	the	methods	of
analysis	are	principally	applied	to	investigating	the	nature	of	material	
entities.
Thus,	the	ultimate	nature	of	matter	is	sought	through	a	reductive	process	and	the
macroscopic	world	is	reduced	to	the	microscopic	world	of	particles.	Yet,	when
the	nature	of	these	particles	is	further	examined,	we	find	that	ultimately	their
very	existence	as	objects	is	called	into	question.	This	interface	between	non-
substantiality	and	phenomena	is	a	fundamental	focus	of	Buddhist	philosophical
analysis	and	of	experiential	analysis	through	meditation	on	the	nature	of	mind.
As	is	now	becoming	more	commonly	known	in	the	contemporary	scientific
field,	a	subtle	understanding	of	the	nature	of	the	arising	and	dissolution	of	both
individual	thoughts	and	the	cycles	of	existence	lies	at	the	heart	of	Buddhist
literature	and	practice.
In	summary,	therefore,	even	though	the	stages	of	preparation	for	engaging	in
the	practices	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	are	extensive,	it	is	said	that,	since	the	mode
of	procedure	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra	follows	a	very	close	correspondence	to	the
nature	of	existence,	human	beings	of	this	world	are	regarded	as	having	the
perfect	 gross	 and	 subtle	 physiological	 basis	 for	 undertaking	 these	 practices
successfully.
Normally	in	our	lives,	if	we	know	that	we	are	going	to	be	confronted	by	a
difficult	 or	 unfamiliar	 situation,	 we	 prepare	 and	 train	 ourselves	 for	 such	 a
circumstance	in	advance,	so	that	when	this	event	actually	happens	we	are	fully
prepared.	As	I	have	outlined,	the	rehearsal	of	the	processes	of	death,	and	those	of
the	intermediate	state,	and	the	emergence	into	a	future	existence,	lies	at	the	very
heart	of	the	path	in	Highest	Yoga	Tantra.	These	practices	are	part	of	my	daily
practice	also	and	because	of	this	I	somehow	feel	a	sense	of	excitement	when	I
think	about	the	experience	of	death.	At	the	same	time,	though,	sometimes	I	do
wonder	whether	or	not	I	will	really	be	able	to	fully	utilise	my	own	preparatory
practices	when	the	actual	moment	of	death	comes!

A	 sense	 of	 uncertainty,	 and	 often	 fear,	 is	 a	 natural	 human	 feeling	 when
thinking	about	the	nature	of	death	and	the	relationship	between	living	and	dying.
It	is	perhaps	not	surprising	therefore	that	the	
Bar-do	Thos-grol	Chen-mo
,	the
Tibetan	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead
,	 a	 treasure-text	 which	 focuses	 on	 this	 important
subject,	has	become	one	of	the	best-known	works	of	Tibetan	literature	in	the
West.	Carrying	out	the	first	complete	translation	of	this	cycle	of	teachings	has
been	an	extraordinary	accomplishment	undertaken	with	great	care	over	many
years.
I	hope	that	the	profound	insights	contained	in	this	work	will	be	a	source	of
inspiration	and	support	to	many	interested	people	around	the	world,	as	they	have
been	in	my	own	culture.

Editor’s	Introduction
The	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	includes	one	of	the	most	detailed	and	compelling
descriptions	 of	 the	 after-death	 state	 in	 world	 literature.	 It	 is	 not	 surprising
therefore	that	when	Chapter	11	of	our	text,	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’,
first	appeared	in	English,	in	1927,	it	caused	a	considerable	stir	and	has	remained
one	of	the	most	well	known	of	Tibet’s	literary	works	ever	since.	In	our	work,	for
the	first	time,	we	are	presenting	a	complete	translation	of	all	twelve	chapters	of
the	compilation	of	texts	known	as	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
,	which	includes
nine	chapters	not	translated	in	W.	Y.	Evans-Wentz’s	original	publication.
Our	intention	in	carrying	out	this	work	was	twofold.	One	was	to	present	the
entire	original	work,	and	the	second	was	to	compose	the	translation	with	the
close	support	and	participation	of	the	contemporary	masters	and	lineage	holders
of	this	tradition.
The	complete	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	a	comprehensive	guide	to	both
living	 and	 dying	 as	 originally	 taught	 by	 the	 great	 master	 from	 Oḍḍiyāna,
Padmasambhava.	Padmasambhava,	along	with	Sāntarakṣita	and	King	Trisong
Detsen,	formally	established	Buddhism	in	Tibet,	during	the	eighth	century,	and
most	Tibetans	revere	him	as	a	‘second	Buddha’.	The	story	of	how	this	teaching
was	first	given	by	Padmasambhava	to	King	Trisong	Detsen	is	presented	in
Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary	History’,	which	follows.
The	compendium	of	texts	known	as	
The	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	contains
exquisitely	written	guidance	and	practices	related	to	transforming	our	experience
in	daily	life,	on	how	to	address	the	processes	of	dying	and	the	after-death	state,
and	on	how	to	help	those	who	are	dying.	These	teachings	include:	methods	for
investigating	and	cultivating	our	experience	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	in	our
daily	 practice	 (Chapters	 2-7),	 guidance	 on	 the	
recognition	 of	 the	 signs	 of
impending	death	and	a	detailed	description	of	the	mental	and	physical	processes
of	dying	(Chapter	8),	rituals	for	the	avoidance	of	premature	death	(Chapter	9),
the	now	famous	guide	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’	that	is	read	to	the
dying	and	the	dead	(Chapter	11),	aspirational	prayers	that	are	read	at	the	time	of
death	(Chapter	12),	an	allegorical	masked	play	that	light-heartedly	dramatises
the	journey	through	the	intermediate	state	(Chapter	13),	and	a	translation	of	the
sacred	mantras	that	are	attached	to	the	body	after	death	and	are	said	to	bring

‘Liberation	by	Wearing’	(Chapter	14).
In	addition,	and	at	the	advice	of	the	late	HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche,	we
have	also	included	two	additional	texts	that	are	not	usually	included,	namely
Chapter	1,	which	poetically	sets	out	the	preliminary	meditations	and	practices
related	to	this	cycle	of	teachings,	and	indeed	to	tantric	practice	in	general,	and
Chapter	10,	the	instructions	on	methods	for	transferring	consciousness	at	the
point	of	death	into	an	enlightened	state,	which	are	referred	to	in	Chapter	11	and
are	an	essential	aspect	of	the	practices	related	to	dying.
Our	second	intention	was	to	present	the	entire	work	in	a	way	that,	as	honestly
as	we	could,	reflects	the	insights	and	intentions	of	the	masters	of	the	lineage	and
gives	a	sense	of	the	elegance	and	moving,	poetic	beauty	of	the	original	work.	In
order	to	do	this,	as	is	described	in	the	Acknowledgements,	the	translation	has
been	 based	 on	 the	 oral	 commentarial	 explanation	 of	 contemporary	 lineage
holders	and	was	carried	out	with	the	continuous	advice	of	contemporary	masters.
Given	the	above,	there	is	very	little	to	say	with	respect	to	offering	further
introduction	to	the	meaning	of	the	texts.	It	is	our	hope	that	with	the	help	of	HH
the	Dalai	Lama’s	Introductory	Commentary,	the	short	introductions	to	each
chapter,	the	notes	and	the	glossary,	the	meaning	will	shine	through	as	directly	as
was	intended.
As	 I	 have	 been	 asked	 to	 do	 so,	 I	 will	 just	 say	 a	 few	 words	 about	 the
psychological	context	of	this	material.	It	may	seem	somewhat	woolly	to	many	if
it	is	said	that	the	insights	that	are	presented	here	come	from	those	who	have
realised	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and	thereby	have	experiential	understanding
of	 the	 processes	 of	 the	 mind	 in	 deep	 sleep,	 dreams,	 the	 waking	 state	 and
throughout	the	processes	of	dying	and	beyond.	But,	as	described	by	the	Dalai
Lama	 in	 the	 Introductory	 Commentary,	 the	 process	 of	 imagining	
and	 then
actualising	the	stages	of	dissolution	of	consciousness	that	will	occur	naturally	at
the	 time	 of	 death	 lies	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 higher	 Tibetan	 Buddhist	 meditative
practices,	as	do	practices	related	to	maintaining	awareness	during	deep	sleep	and
while	dreaming.
As	 Gyurme	 Dorje	 describes	 in	 ‘A	 Brief	 Literary	 History’,	 this	 cycle	 of
teachings	is	based	on	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
.	This	text	is	described	as	having
been	 received	 in	 a	 revelation	 from	 the	 primordial	 buddha	 Samantabhadra,
transmitted	 through	 the	 agency	 of	 the	 meditational	 deities	 Vajrasattva	 and
Guhyapati	Vajrapāṇi.	In	other	words,	the	source	is	Samantabhadra,	who	is	the
resonance	 of	 pure	 awareness,	 the	 natural	 purity	 of	 mental	 consciousness,
transmitted	 through	 an	 embodiment	 of	 the	 insight,	 compassion	 and

communicative	skills	(skilful	means)	of	all	the	buddhas,	that	is	to	say	of	all	those
who	abide	in	an	unmoving	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind.
As	 in	 all	 the	 major	 Buddhist	 tantric	 systems,	 the	
Guhyagarbha	 Tantra
describes	a	maṇḍala,	which	is	a	visual	representation	of	the	components	of	the
enlightened	mind.	Our	chart	of	the	maṇḍala	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
(Appendix	Two)	sets	out	the	core	aspects	of	the	symbolism	of	the	maṇḍala
associated	with	our	text.	As	is	always	the	case,	this	symbolism	is	based	on	the
classical	understanding	of	the	nature	of	a	person’s	psycho-physical	components,
as	described	in	the	Abhidharma	literature,	which	is	common	to	all	forms	of
Buddhism.	This	analysis	of	the	components	of	our	being	can	be	undertaken	with
our	normal	conceptual	mind.
The	actual	experience	of	the	luminosities	which	are	said	to	underlie	the
maṇḍala	is	however	only	possible	as	a	result	of	the	accomplishment	of	very
subtle	meditative	states,	which	are	fruitional	aspects	of	the	path	of	Highest	Yoga
Tantra.	As	the	Dalai	Lama	relates	in	his	commentary,	these	luminosities	only
become	apparent	to	the	meditator	once	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind
is	 achieved.	 This	 occurs	 during	 the	 processes	 of	 meditations,	 which	 are
simulacra	of	the	processes	of	dying	and	the	re-emergence	of	consciousness	from
a	non-conceptual	inner	radiance,	the	mind’s	ultimate	nature.	The	processes	of	the
dissolution	of	the	coarse	forms	of	consciousness	into	inner	radiance	and	the
emergence	of	consciousness	from	inner	radiance	also	occur	naturally	at	the	time
of	death.	In	other	words,	according	to	Buddhist	tradition,	experiential	access	to
the	 processes,	 which	 mirror	 those	
of	 dying	 and	 the	 re-emergence	 of
consciousness	after	death,	is	achievable	in	the	waking	state.
When	HH	Dilgo	Khyenste	Rinpoche	gave	his	commentary	to	the	text	he
explained	that	the	‘Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality’,	the	central
section	of	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’,	is	an	expression	of	the	esoteric
Thodgal	practices	of	Dzogchen,	the	‘Great	Perfection’	teachings.	Thodgal	is	the
pinnacle	of	meditative	practice	according	to	the	Nyingma	school	and	it	results	in
the	direct	experience	during	meditation	of	the	luminosities	and	the	maṇḍala	of
meditational	deities	that	are	described	in	Chapter	11.	This	arising	of	the	five-
coloured	luminosities	as	a	result	of	actualising	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	is	a
phenomenon	that	has	been	described	by	all	the	great	meditators	of	the	four	major
Buddhist	schools	of	Tibet	and	the	pre-Buddhist	Bon	tradition.	The	point	I	am
leading	up	to	here	is	that	the	experiences	described	in	our	text	relate	to	the
modalities	of	our	awareness	from	moment	to	moment,	in	our	waking	state,	in
deep	sleep,	in	our	dreams	and	also	during	the	transition	from	life	to	death	and

beyond.
In	this	sense	‘The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing’	can	be	read	as	a	wonderful
metaphorical	narrative	illustrating	the	processes	of	our	cognitive	state,	whether
in	our	waking	state	or	in	death.
Carl	Jung	in	his	commentary	to	Evans-Wentz’s	1927	edition	of	the	
Tibetan
Book	of	the	Dead
	spoke	about	how	compelling	he	found	it	to	look	at	‘The	Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’	backwards.	From	a	psychoanalytical	point	of	view	this	is
indeed	interesting,	as	our	text	can	then	be	seen	as	providing	a	guide	for	tracing
our	confused	and	deluded	states,	back	through	our	conditioned	attraction	and
aversion	to	selected	aspects	of	our	experience,	back	through	the	weave	of	our
habitual	tendencies	and	mental	constructs	and	a	relentless	series	of	voluntary	or
involuntary	mental	choices,	back	through	the	illusory	comfort	generated	by	our
sense	of	ego,	right	back	to	a	pure	original	cognitive	event.	This	is	something	that
we	 can	 explore	 during	 our	 own	 waking	 experience	 by	 analysing	 how	 our
thoughts	originate	in	the	mind,	interact	with	our	mental	constructs	and	guide	our
emotions	and	subsequent	actions.
Chapter	4	of	our	text,	‘The	Introduction	to	Awareness’,	addresses	this	process
of	exploration	directly.	Here	we	find	guidance	for	the	meditator	on	how	to
recognise	the	mind’s	ultimate	nature,	the	underlying,	mirror-like	pure	awareness,
free	from	dualistic	
elaboration,	from	which	all	our	thoughts	and	perceptions	arise
and	into	which	they	always	again	dissolve.	Chapter	11	then	gives	a	symbolic
description	of	how	the	pure	radiances	of	our	awareness,	the	ultimate	nature	of
our	 pure	 psycho-physical	 components	 and	 elemental	 properties,	 arise	 as
luminosities	and	meditational	deities.	At	this	critical	point,	either	we	recognise
these	luminosities	and	meditational	deities	as	the	embodiments	of	our	own	actual
nature,	and	thereby	remain	in	a	state	of	pure	perception,	or,	having	failed	to
recognise	their	appearance	as	being	a	natural	expression	of	the	ultimate	nature	of
all	phenomena,	we	are	then	inexorably	drawn	into	the	clouded,	dull	impulses	of
dualistic	experience.	Once	this	occurs,	the	matrix	of	our	habitual	tendencies	and
mental	 constructs	 is	 activated	 and	 this	 generates	 our	 sense	 of	 independent,
individual	identity.	By	now	our	ego,	which	cannot	accept	the	openness	and
clarity	of	the	pristine	perceptual	state,	is	established	and	the	mind	functions
purely	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 wanting	 to	 satisfy	 its	 conditioned	 expectations	 and
impulses,	from	moment	to	moment.
In	this	ego-bound	state	our	thoughts,	speech	and	actions	are	then	modulated
by	a	process	of	inner	judgement.	As	the	text	describes,	death	holds	up	an	all-
seeing	 mirror,	 ‘the	 mirror	 of	 past	 actions’,	 to	 our	 eyes,	 in	 which	 the

consequences	of	all	our	negative	and	positive	actions	are	clearly	seen	and	there
is	a	weighing	of	our	past	actions	in	the	light	of	their	consequences,	the	balance
of	which	will	determine	the	kind	of	existence	or	mental	state	we	are	being	driven
to	enter.	The	‘life-review’	aspect	of	this	process,	metaphorically	described	in	our
text	as	the	weighing	of	white	pebbles,	representing	our	positive	actions,	against
the	weight	of	black	pebbles,	representing	our	negative	actions,	is	wonderfully
illustrated	 by	 the	 poet	 Heathcote	 Williams’	 phrase	 ‘death	 develops	 life’s
photographs’,	 which	 succinctly	 evokes	 the	 notion	 of	 our	 day-to-day
obliviousness	to	the	consequences	of	our	actions	being	developed	or	processed
in	death	so	that	we	can	experience	them	face	to	face.
Following	the	expansive	process	of	the	‘life-review’,	the	mind	is	then	driven
into	a	new	equilibrium,	avoiding	the	chaos	of	dissociation.	This	twofold	process
of	inner	judgement,	the	‘life-review’	followed	by	the	coalescence	of	the	mind
into	a	new	modality,	is	symbolically	represented	in	our	text	by	the	actions	of
Yama,	who	is	the	embodiment	of	the	infallible	laws	of	cause	
and	effect.	In	our
waking	 state,	 this	 weighing	 and	 modulation	 of	 the	 momentum	 of	 our	 past
thoughts,	speech	and	actions	is	of	course	largely	hidden,	but	we	do	experience
this	in	our	sense	of	‘conscience’	at	the	time	of	thinking,	speaking	or	acting.	In
death,	as	in	life,	the	process	of	inner	judgement	is	not	of	course	a	judgement	by
an	external	being	but	it	is	the	result	of	our	own	mind’s	innate	dynamic	of
manifesting	the	natural	fruition	of	our	own	mental	constructs	and	coalescing	this
ripening	into	a	new	equilibrium.	At	this	stage,	in	particular,	just	as	we	are	about
to	enter	a	changed	emotive	state,	it	is	absolutely	critical	that	we	recognise	the
fundamental	reality	that	we	are	experiencing	the	results	of	the	mental	states
which	 we	 ourselves	 have	 generated	 and	 that	 we	 use	 this	 understanding	 to
recognise	the	actual	nature	of	our	experience.	In	our	day-to-day	life	we	know
that	if	we	begin	to	feel	angry,	for	example,	this	immediately	creates	an	internal
disturbance	and	this	disturbance	creates	a	shift	in	the	way	we	perceive	both
others	and	our	environment,	which	in	turn	affects	the	way	in	which	others	react
to	us,	which	then	reinforces	our	initial	anger	and	we	feel	confirmed	in	that	new
state.	This	is	the	cycle	of	experiencing	the	results	of	the	mental	states	that	we
ourselves	 have	 generated,	 which	 can	 occur	 from	 moment	 to	 moment	 or
according	to	our	text	from	lifetime	to	lifetime.
Finally,	if	there	is	no	recognition	and	as	a	culmination	of	this	entire	process,
our	text	describes	how,	driven	on	by	a	relentless	search	for	security	and	the	urge
to	 resolve	 our	 impulses	 and	 expectations,	 in	 a	 mental	 realm	 where	 our
expectations	and	actual	reality	do	not	match,	and	based	on	the	ever-present

swinging	back	and	forth	of	our	attraction	and	aversion,	we	enter	into	an	emotive
state	whose	focus	can	be	anywhere	across	the	spectrum	of	elation,	jealousy,
pride,	confusion,	blankness,	desire,	craving,	anger,	hatred	or	fear.	These	states
are	depicted	in	our	text	as	the	realms	of	existence	into	which	we	may	pass	at
birth.
Given	the	above,	even	if	we	do	not	accept	the	Buddhist	understanding	that	the
modalities	of	our	consciousness	in	deep	sleep,	dreams	and	our	waking	state
mirror	 those	 of	 death,	 we	 can	 still	 apply	 the	 advice	 given	 in	 ‘The	 Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’	to	our	everyday	experience.	Giving	up	our	compulsive
attraction	and	aversion	to	aspects	of	our	perceptual	realm,	glimpsing	the	causal
dynamic	of	our	actual	condition	and	coming	to	the	realisation	that	what	we	see	is
the	product	of	our	own	mental	constructs,	and	that	
we	therefore	do	have	the
potential	to	view	our	experience	more	insightfully,	is	a	powerful	method	of
releasing	us	from	the	dissonant	and	perhaps	even	fearful	qualities	of	our	own
self-made,	perceptual	landscape.
Chapters	1-7	provide	us	with	a	framework	for	achieving	this	release	in	our
daily	lives.	Chapter	1	poetically	evokes	the	perspectives	that	may	lead	us	to
realise	 that	 understanding	 our	 actual	 nature	 and	 understanding	 our	 current
condition	as	human	beings	are	worthwhile,	Chapters	2-6	offer	us	methods	for
training	our	minds	to	instinctively	recognise	the	actual	nature	of	our	being	and
existence,	and	Chapter	7	provides	a	framework	for	modulating	and	refining	our
motivation,	perspectives	and	actions.
It	is	undeniably	the	case	that	in	our	society	we	do	not	easily	accept	that	death
is	a	natural	part	of	life,	which	results	in	a	perpetual	sense	of	insecurity	and	fear,
and	many	are	confused	at	the	time	of	the	death	of	a	loved	one,	not	knowing	what
they	can	do	to	help	the	one	that	has	passed	away	or	how	to	address	their	own
grief.	Exploring	ways	of	overcoming	our	fear	of	death	and	adopting	a	creative
approach	 at	 the	 time	 of	 bereavement,	 that	 is,	 focusing	 one’s	 energy	 on
supporting	the	one	that	has	passed	away,	are	both	extraordinary	benefits	of	the
insights	and	practices	that	are	so	beautifully	expressed	in	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
.
When	I	think	of	these	things	I	often	remember	the	Dalai	Lama	saying:	‘When
we	look	at	life	and	death	from	a	broader	perspective,	then	dying	is	just	like
changing	our	clothes!	When	this	body	becomes	old	and	useless,	we	die	and	take
on	a	new	body,	which	is	fresh,	healthy	and	full	of	energy!	This	need	not	be	so
bad!’
	

Graham	Coleman	
Thimpu,	Bhutan

A	Brief	Literary	History	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
by	Gyurme	Dorje
	
	
	
Since	the	publication	in	1927	of	Lama	Kazi	Dawa	Samdup	and	W.	Y.	Evans-
Wentz’s	pioneering	English	translation	of	three	chapters	from	the	cycle	of	texts
known	 in	 the	 original	 Tibetan	 as	
The	 Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing	 in	 the
Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
),	the	chapters	they	translated,
dealing	with	the	nature	of	the	after-death	state,	including	the	accompanying
aspirational	prayers,	have	attracted	a	compelling	interest	outside	Tibet	under	the
title	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead.
	Learned	Tibetans	today	often	express	their
surprise	 that	 this	 particular	 collection	 of	 meditative	 practices	 concerning
methods	for	understanding	the	nature	of	mind	and	transforming	our	experiences
throughout	the	round	of	life	and	death	has	become	one	of	the	most	well	known
of	all	the	works	of	Tibetan	literature	in	translation.	This	renown	is	especially
unexpected	when	one	considers	the	esoteric	origins	of	the	text	and	its	highly
restricted	 transmission	 within	 Tibet	 until	 the	 mid-fifteenth	 century.	 It	 is	 on
account	of	this	widespread	popular	recognition	however	that	the	title	coined	by
the	 editor	 of	 the	 first	 translation,	 Evans-Wentz,	 has	 been	 retained	 in	 all
subsequent	translations	and	related	studies.	Following	in	this	tradition,	we	too
have	retained	the	title	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	to	refer	to	the	first	complete
English	translation	of	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate
States
,	 which	 includes	 translations	 of	 all	 twelve	 chapters	 of	 the	 original
compilation.
EARLY	ORIGINS
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	is	an	outstanding
example	of	Nyingma	literature.	The	Nyingmapa	are	the	followers	of	the	oldest
of	all	the	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	
tracing	their	lineage	back	to	the	first

wave	of	transmission	of	the	Buddhist	teachings	to	Tibet,	to	the	royal	dynastic
period	of	Tibetan	history	in	the	eighth	century,	when	great	Indian	masters	such
as	Padmasambhava,	Vimalamitra	and	Buddhaguhya	initially	introduced	the	three
inner	classes	of	tantra:	Mahāyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Atiyoga.	These	tantra	texts	are
differentiated	on	the	basis	of	their	distinctive	meditative	techniques,	known
respectively	as	the	generation	stage,	the	perfection	stage	and	the	Great	Perfection
(Dzogchen).
All	 traditions	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism	 today	 share	 the	 inheritance	 of	 the
canonical	compilations	of	the	Indian	Buddhist	scriptures	and	treatises	contained
in	the	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur.
	The	former	contains	those	teachings	of	the	Buddhas
(vinaya,	 sūtras	 and	 tantras)	 that	 were	 translated	 from	 Sanskrit	 and	 other
languages	into	Tibetan,	mostly	from	the	late	tenth	century	onwards	and	compiled
initially	by	Buton	Rinchendrub	(1290	—	1364).	The	latter	includes	the	classical
Indian	commentaries	that	were	also	translated	from	Sanskrit	into	Tibetan.	In	a
recently	published	and	collated	master	edition	of	both	the	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur
these	texts	comprise	180	volumes.
At	the	same	time,	each	school	has	its	own	distinctive	writings.	The	particular
literature	of	the	Nyingma	school	comprises	translations	from	Sanskrit	and	other
languages,	which	are	preserved	in	the	twenty-six	volume	
Collected	Tantras	of
the	 Nyingmapa
	
(
rNying-ma’i	 rgyud-’bum
),	 and	 a	 companion	 anthology	 of
commentarial	treatises,	written	by	successive	generations	of	Indian	and	Tibetan
lineage	holders.	The	latter,	which	has	been	faithfully	handed	down	through	a
‘long	lineage	of	oral	precepts’	(
ring-brgyud	bka’-ma
),	that	is	to	say	through	an
unbroken	lineage	of	transmission	from	one	generation	of	accomplished	masters
to	the	next,	is	continually	growing	and	currently	comprises	120	volumes	in	a
recently	published	edition.
The	
Collected	 Tantras	 of	 the	 Nyingmapa
	 has	 three	 main	 sections,
corresponding	to	the	compilations	of	Atiyoga,	Anuyoga	and	Mahāyoga.	Among
them,	the	most	influential	single	text	is	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
,	a	revelation	of
the	 primordial	 buddha	 Samantabhadra,	 transmitted	 through	 Vajrasattva	 and
Guhyapati	Vajrapāṇi.	The	compendium	of	texts	that	we	now	know	as	the	
Tibetan
Book	of	the	Dead
	bases	its	symbolism	and	iconography	on	the	
Guhyagarbha
Tantra
.	Founded	on	the	classical	Abhidharma	
view	of	the	elements,	psycho-
physical	aggregates,	etc.,	this	tantra	text	is	the	earliest	known	literary	work	to
portray	 the	 natural	 purity	 and	 natural	 transformation	 of	 our	 mundane
psychological	 states,	 respectively,	 as	 the	 maṇḍala	 of	 the	 forty-two	 peaceful
deities	and	as	the	maṇḍala	of	the	fifty-eight	wrathful	deities.	Though	generally

and	rightly	classified	as	a	Mahāyoga	text,	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	has	also	been
obliquely	 interpreted	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 Dzogchen,	 most	 famously	 by
Longchen	Rabjampa	(1308	—	63).	The	meditative	techniques	of	both	Mahāyoga
and	Dzogchen	are	clearly	expressed	among	the	chapters	of	our	present	work:	the
generation	stage	of	meditation	is	emphasised	in	Chapters	5-7,	and	the	Great
Perfection	in	Chapters	4	and	11,	these	latter	two	chapters	being	based	on	the
teachings	of	the	two	key	aspects	of	the	Great	Perfection,	namely	Cutting	through
Resistance	 (
khregs-chod
)	 and	 All-surpassing	 Realisation	 (
thod-rgal
)
respectively.	Thus	from	the	point	of	view	of	its	theoretical	foundation	and
practice,	as	well	as	in	its	iconography	and	symbolism,	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
	 echoes	 its	 roots	 in	 the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	 but,	 in	 addition,	 vividly
incorporates	the	classical	teachings	of	Dzogchen.
The	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	 was	 initially	 compiled	 by	 King	 Indrabhūti	 and
Kukkurāja	of	Sahor	in	north-west	India	(
circa
	sixth	century).	The	monarch,	also
known	as	King	Dza,	received	the	whole	corpus	of	the	Mahāyoga	tantras	in	a
vision	from	Vajrasattva,	and	Kukkurāja,	a	great	accomplished	master,	divided
this	literature	into	eighteen	books	(
tantras
)	—	the	most	all-embracing	of	which
is	the	
Guhyagarbha
.	During	the	eighth	century,	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	was
translated	into	Tibetan	from	Sanskrit	three	times:	initially	by	Buddhaguhya	and
Vairocana,	 secondly	 by	 Padmasambhava	 and	 Nyak	 Jñānakumāra,	 and
definitively	by	Vimalamitra	with	Nyak	Jñānakumāra	and	Ma	Rinchen	Chok.	A
much	later	indigenous	Tibetan	translation	was	also	prepared	in	the	fifteenth
century	by	Tharlo	Nyima	Gyeltsen	and	Go	Lotsāwa.	The	anthology	of	treatises
related	to	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	
includes	a	large	number	of	commentaries	on
this	text,	of	both	Indian	and	Tibetan	origin,	composed	by	illustrious	masters	such
as	L
ῑ
lāvajra,	Buddhaguhya,	Rongzom	Paṇḍita,	Longchen	Rabjampa	and	Lochen
Dharmaśr
ῑ.
The	iconography	and	symbolism	of	the	hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
presented	in	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	subsequently	
gave	rise	to	a	whole	genre	of
literature	in	Tibet	known	as	the	Cycles	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	(
zhi-
khro
),	among	which	our	compilation	of	texts	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in
the	Intermediate	States
	is	the	most	influential.
THE	CLOSE	LINEAGE	OF	TREASURES
According	 to	 traditional	 accounts,	 when	 Padmasambhava	 introduced	 these

teachings	to	Tibet	in	the	eighth	century	he	foresaw	that	the	oral	transmission	of
the	 ‘long	 lineage’	 would	 be	 subjected	 over	 time	 to	 corruption	 and
misapplication,	and	that	the	efficacy	of	the	teachings	would	be	diminished.	To
counteract	this,	through	the	agency	of	his	consort	Yeshe	Tsogyal	and	other
foremost	disciples,	he	concealed	a	large	number	of	‘treasure-teachings’	(
gter-
chos
),	 in	 the	 form	 of	 books	 and	 sacred	 artefacts,	 at	 power-places	 (
gnas
)
throughout	the	Tibetan	plateau,	predicting	that	they	would	be	rediscovered	in
future	 generations	 by	 their	 respective	 ‘treasure-finders’	 (
gter-ston
)	 and
promulgated	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 future	 generations.	 Prophecies	 were	 written,
describing	those	who	would	have	the	power	to	unearth	such	revelations	in	the
future	—	figures	of	the	calibre	of	Nyangrel	Nyima	Ozer,	Guru	Chowang,	and	the
discoverer	of	our	text,	Karma	Lingpa.	The	term	‘treasure-teachings’	is	generally
extended	 to	 include	 not	 only	 concealed	 ‘earth-treasures’	 (
sa-gter
),	 but	 also
revelations	 discovered	 in	 a	 telepathic	 manner	 directly	 from	 the	 enlightened
intention	of	buddha-mind	(
dgongs-gter
),	and	pure	visionary	experiences	(
dag-
snang
).
This	notion	of	the	concealment	of	texts	in	the	form	of	treasure	had	precedents
in	both	Indian	and	Chinese	Buddhism.	Nāgārjuna,	for	example,	is	said	to	have
received	the	
Prajñāpāramitā	Sūtras
	in	the	form	of	treasure	from	the	ocean-
depths,	and,	according	to	Nyingma	doxographers,	a	recension	of	
Mahāyoga
Tantras
	
was	revealed	to	the	eight	teachers	of	Padmasambhava,	at	the	S
ῑ
tavana
charnel	ground	near	Vajrāsana.	Similarly,	the	Chinese	Buddhist	tradition	of
elemental	divination,	which	includes	aspects	of	
Feng	Shui
	and	
Yi	Jing
,	also
recounts	how	the	bodhisattva	Mañjughoṣa	concealed	certain	divinatory	texts	on
Wang	Hai	Feng,	the	Eastern	Peak	of	the	sacred	Mount	Wutai	Shan.	Tibetan
sources	 then	 describe	 how	 Mañjughoṣa	 subsequently	 revealed	 the	
Precious
Clarifying	Lamp
	(
Rinchen	gsal-ba’i	sgron-me
)	to	the	Chinese	master	Dahura
Nagpo.
Since	the	initial	discoveries	of	the	first	Tibetan	‘treasure-finder’	Sangye	Lama,
in	the	eleventh	century,	a	vast	literature	has	been	produced	in	Tibet	by	way	of
revelation	through	the	‘close	lineage	of	treasures’	(
nye-brgyud	gter-ma
),	and
redacted	 within	 the	 public	 domain.	 The	
Collected	Treasures
	 of	 the	 various
treasure-finders	are	too	voluminous	to	mention	here,	but	many	of	their	works	are
represented	in	the	extensive	nineteenth-century	anthology	known	as	the	
Store	of
Precious	Treasures
	(
Rinchen	gter-mdzod
),	which	was	recently	republished	in	76
volumes.	Just	as	the	anthology	of	the	‘long	lineage’	contains	many	commentaries
on	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
,	a	significant	number	of	‘treasure-teachings’	are	also

inspired	by	its	portrayal	of	the	hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	Among
them	the	most	elaborate	is	the	cycle	discovered	in	the	fourteenth	century	by
Karma	 Lingpa	 —	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 A	 Profound	 Sacred
Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened
Intention
	(
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
).	The	compendium	of	texts
now	known	outside	Tibet	as	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	an	abridgement	of
this	treasury	of	texts	discovered	by	Karma	Lingpa.
THE	CONCEALMENT	BY	PADMASAMBHAVA
The	extant	cycle	of	texts	that	comprise	Karma	Lingpa’s	revelations	includes	a
few	short	biographies	and	historical	accounts	of	the	work’s	original	concealment
and	subsequent	revelation,	which	were	composed	by	later	lineage	holders.	The
following	passage	from	the	
Middle-length	Empowerment
	(pp.	61-4)	describes
the	roots	of	this	tradition:
At	the	time	when	[Padmasambhava]	was	turning	incalculable	wheels	of	the
teachings	concerning	the	supremely	secret	vehicle	[of	Vajrayāna],	he	revealed,	in
accord	with	the	individual	capacities	of	the	fortunate	king	[Trisong	Detsen]	and
his	subjects,	many	practices	related	to	the	generation	and	perfection	stages	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities;	and	these	were	[later]	concealed,	for	the	most
part,	as	profound	treasures,	for	the	benefit	of	beings	in	the	future.
When	Padmasambhava	was	nearing	the	completion	of	his	direct	
spiritual	work
and	teaching	in	Tibet,	the	sovereign	and	his	son	[Prince	Mutri	Tsenpo],	along
with	the	translator	Chokrolui	Gyelsten	and	others,	offered	him	a	maṇḍala	of	gold
and	turquoise,	and	fervently	made	the	following	supplication:	‘Although	your
compassion	is	always	present	and	in	the	past	you	have	held	high	the	incalculable
beacons	of	the	teaching,	according	to	the	outer	and	inner	vehicles,	yet	for	the
benefit	of	ourselves,	the	king,	ministers,	friends	and	subjects,	and	for	future
beings	of	the	degenerate	age,	we	request	you	to	give	a	teaching	which	is	the
quintessence	of	all	the	teachings	of	the	outer	and	inner	vehicles;	one	through
which	buddhahood	may	be	attained	in	a	single	lifetime;	one	which	will	bestow
liberation	by	merely	hearing	it,	a	profound	and	concise	teaching	containing	the
essential	meaning.’
Thus,	 [in	 response	 to	 their	 supplication]	 the	 Great	 Master	 replied,	 ‘O!
Sovereign	 King,	 Prince,	 Ministers,	 in	 accord	 with	 your	 wish,	 I	 do	 have	 a
teaching	which	is	the	essential	point	of	all	the	six	million	four	hundred	thousand

tantras	of	the	Great	Perfection,	which	were	brought	forth	from	the	enlightened
intention	of	glorious	Samantabhadra.	By	merely	hearing	this	teaching,	the	doors
leading	to	birth	in	inferior	existences	will	be	blocked.	By	merely	understanding
it	you	will	arrive	at	the	level	of	supreme	bliss.	Those	who	take	its	meaning	to
heart	 will	 reach	 the	 irreversible	 level	 of	 the	 spontaneously	 accomplished
awareness-holders.	It	can	bring	great	benefit	for	all	those	who	are	connected
with	it.
‘Although	I	do	possess	such	a	teaching,	since	those	who	are	of	weak	mind,	or
who	are	naturally	inclined	towards	the	Lesser	Vehicle,	or	who	lack	good	fortune,
and	harbour	wrong	views	and	doubts,	may	disparage	this	teaching	and	thereby
fall	into	inferior	existences,	you	should	not	proclaim	[this	teaching]	to	others,
even	[by	whispering	its	name]	into	the	wind.	It	should	be	concealed	as	a	[buried]
treasure	for	the	sake	of	future	beings	of	the	degenerate	age.’
So	it	was	that	he	named	this	teaching,	which	essentialises	all	teachings,	the
Peace	ful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
,	and	he	bestowed	it
on	the	translator,	[Chokro]lui	Gyeltsen,	as	his	legacy	[of	good	fortune].	Then,
directing	his	enlightened	intention	towards	living	beings	of	the	future	degenerate
age,	who	would	be	of	meagre	merit,	he	concealed	it	in	the	form	of	a	treasure	at
Mount	Gampodar	in	Dakpo,	at	a	site	which	resembles	a	dancing	god.
THE	PROPHECY	CONCERNING	KARMA	LINGPA
Padmasambhava’s	prophesies	concerning	the	treasure-finder	Karma	Lingpa	and
his	immediate	successors	are	also	recounted	elsewhere	within	the	cycle.	The
following	verses	are	taken	from	Gendun	Gyeltsen’s	fifteenth-century	account,
entitled	
Padmasambhava’s	Prophecy	of	the	Treasure-finder	and	the	Series	of
Authentic	Lineage	Teachers
	(pp.	22ff.).	In	particular,	they	offer	a	rationale	for
the	original	concealment	of	the	texts	and	predictions	regarding	their	subsequent
discovery	and	secret	transmission.	It	is	clear	that	even	in	this	early	formative
period	the	cycle	of	texts	had	acquired	two	distinct	titles,	
The	Great	Liberation	by
Hearing	during	the	Intermediate	States
,	and	
The	Natural	Liberation	through
Recognition	of	Enlightened	Intention
,	reflecting	its	shorter	and	longer	versions.
It	says	in	a	prophetic	declaration	of	Orgyan	Rinpoche:
‘In	the	future,	during	the	final	era,	the	degenerate	age,
When	monks	[act]	like	pigs	and	make	women	pregnant,

When	virtuous	actions	generate	and	sustain	resentment,
When	the	most	noble	of	monks	takes	a	bride,
When	factionalism	and	wars	are	widespread,
At	that	time	there	is	no	doubt	that	all	those	bereft	of	such	instructions
Will	fall	into	the	inferior	existences.
So	to	benefit	the	sentient	beings	of	this	degenerate	age,
I	have	committed	[this	cycle	of	teachings]	to	writing,
And	concealed	them	at	Mount	Gampodar.
In	that	age,	a	supremely	fortunate	son	will	be	born.
His	father	will	have	the	name	Accomplished	Master	Nyinda,
And	he	will	be	the	courageous	“Karma	Lingpa”.
On	his	right	thigh	there	will	be	a	mole,
Resembling	the	eye	of	pristine	cognition,
And	he	will	be	born	in	the	dragon	or	snake	year,
Into	a	heroic	family	line,	the	fruit	of	past	good	actions.
May	that	fortunate	person	encounter	this	[teaching]!
‘But	he	[Karma	Lingpa]	should	not	publicly	teach	the	cycles	of
The	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 Natural	 Liberation	 through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
To	anyone	at	all,	even	by	whispering	into	the	wind,
And	so	it	should	remain	until	the	time	of	the	third	lineage	holder.
Obstacles	will	arise	if	these	[teachings]	are	publicly	taught!
However,	he	should	impart	the	cycle	of	the
Great	Compassionate	One:	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
To	all	of	his	fortunate	students!
	
‘If	the	oral	instructions	of	the	lineage	issuing	from	the	third	generation
lineage	holder
Are	kept	secret	for	seven	years,	there	will	be	no	obstacles.
When	seven	years	have	passed,
That	[third	generation	successor]	may	properly	impart	to	others
The	empowerments	and	practical	application	of	the	[abridged]	cycle,
The	
[Great]	Liberation	[by	Hearing]	during	the	Intermediate	States.
Then,	when	nine	years	have	passed,	the	[complete]	cycle	of	the
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
Should	be	imparted	gradually,	not	all	at	once!
	

‘These	treasures	will	be	extracted	in	the	region	of	Dakpo,	in	Southern
Kongpo,
And	they	will	be	concentrated	for	the	sake	of	living	beings,
In	the	region	of	Draglong,	in	Upper	Kongpo.
Karma	Lingpa’s	activity	on	behalf	of	living	beings	will	ripen	in	the
north!’
THE	LIFE	OF	KARMA	LINGPA
Although	the	exact	dates	of	Karma	Lingpa	are	unknown,	his	birth	and	death
have	 been	 accurately	 placed	 within	 the	 fourteenth	 century.	 The	 following
passages	describing	his	life	and	those	of	his	immediate	successors	are	taken	from
Gyarawa	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyeltsen’s	 fifteenth-century	
Jewel	 Garland:	 An
Abridged	 History
	
of	 the	 Lineage	 (pp.	 40ff.).	 Of	 particular	 interest	 is	 the
discovery	of	two	distinct	cycles	of	treasure-teachings,	the	well-known	
Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
	
,	and	the
Great	Compassionate	One:	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
.	The	latter	is	no
longer	extant	in	this	form,	although	it	appears	to	have	been	the	source	for	the
masked	drama	contained	in	Chapter	13	of	the	present	work.

Karma	Lingpa
[Revered	as	an	emanation	of	the	great	translator	Chokrolui	Gyeltsen],
Karma	Lingpa	was	born	at	Khyerdrup,	above	Dakpo	in	Southern	Tibet.
He	was	the	eldest	son	of	the	accomplished	master	Nyinda	Sangye,	an
upholder	of	the	mantra	tradition	and	a	treasure-finder	in	his	own	right.
In	 his	 fifteenth	 year,	 the	 prophetic	 declaration	 and	 the	 auspicious
coincidence	came	together.	From	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembles	a
dancing	god,	he	extracted	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural
Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
,	along	with	the	
Great	Compassionate
One:	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	and	other	treasures.
Unfortunately	others	spoke	ill	of	him	because	he	did	not	form	an
auspicious	 relationship	 with	 the	 intended	 consort	 who	 had	 been
prophesised	for	him	in	connection	with	his	discovery	of	these	treasure-
teachings.	He	did	have	one	son,	but	because	he	showed	a	yellow	scroll
[containing	his	treasures]	to	his	student	before	the	time	when	he	was
destined	to	impart	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation
of	 Enlightened	 Intention
,	 it	 is	 said	 he	 encountered	 life-threatening
obstacles.
Karma	Lingpa	was	endowed	with	innumerable	attributes,	and	dwelt	as
the	very	embodiment	of	unimpeded	enlightened	activity.	So,	knowing	of
his	own	untimely	death,	he	said	with	prescience:	‘In	the	near	future,
many	marks	in	the	form	of	lotus	flowers	will	appear	on	my	body!’,	and
he	also	made	numerous	other	clairvoyant	statements.	Then,	the	next	year,
when	he	was	on	the	point	of	death,	he	granted	the	empowerments	and
transmissions	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation
of	Enlightened	Intention
,	to	his	son	alone,	and	not	to	any	others,	saying
‘You	should	entrust	this	teaching	to	a	saintly	person	who	maintains	the
commitments	and	has	the	name	Nyinda.	His	actions	for	the	welfare	of
living	beings	will	be	most	extensive!’	Making	many	such	prophecies,
Karma	Lingpa	passed	away.
Thus	the	first	lineage	holder	was	Karma	Lingpa’s	own	son,	Nyinda	Choje,	the
author	of	Chapter	1	of	the	present	work.	The	second-generation	lineage	holder,
Lama	Nyinda	Ozer	of	Tsikar	Monastery	in	Longpo,	was	born	in	1409	(earth
female	ox	year),	and	he	is	said	to	have	written	down	the	text	contained	in
Chapter	1	of	the	present	work.	It	is	the	third-generation	lineage	holder	Gyarawa
Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso	who	has	the	distinction	of	being	the	first	person	to

publicly	teach	the	treasures	of	Karma	Lingpa.	The	transmissions	of	the	
Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities
	and	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate
States
	that	eventually	came	to	permeate	the	entire	Tibetan	plateau	can	all	trace
their	roots	back	to	his	teaching	activity,	particularly	at	Menmo	and	Thangdrok
monasteries	in	Kongpo.
The	extensive	dispersion	of	the	lineage	throughout	Tibet	and	the	Himalayan
region	that	issued	from	Gyarawa	has	been	recently	documented,	along	with
visual	charts,	by	Bryan	J.	Cuevas	in	his	work	
The	Hidden	History	of	the	Tibetan
Book	of	the	Dead
.	We	will	not	therefore	describe	this	again	here.	However,	one
important	figure,	from	the	perspective	of	the	literary	history,	is	Rigdzin	Nyima
Drakpa	(1647-1710),	who	in	his	later	years,	at	Takmogang	and	Chakru,	began
transcribing	and	collating	the	various	texts	associated	with	Karma	Lingpa’s
cycle.	It	is	clear	from	the	various	extant	lineage	prayers	that	he	was	directly
responsible	for	standardising	the	shorter	anthology	entitled	
The	Great	Liberation
by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	in	its	present	form.
Rigdzin	Nyima	Drakpa’s	lineage	was	particularly	influential	in	the	nomadic
areas	of	Sok	Dzong,	where	the	mantrins	of	the	Kabgye	Lhakhang	even	now
maintain	 the	 lineage	 of	 his	 teachings,	 and	 in	 Dzachuka,	 where	 his	 teacher
Dzogchen	Pema	Rikdzin	founded	Dzogchen	Monastery	in	1685.	He	also	formed
a	spiritual	rapport	with	Terdak	Lingpa,	on	account	of	which	the	transmissions	of
Tsele,	Lhalung	and	Mindroling	all	converged	in	his	own	son	Orgyan	Tendzin.
Subsequently,	the	teachings	of	the	Karma	Lingpa	tradition	were	passed	on	from
Mindroling	to	Dzogchen	in	the	following	line	of	transmission:	Pema	Gyurme
Gyatso,	 Gyelse	 Ratna	 Vija,	 Dzogchen	 II	 Gyurme	 Thekchok	 Tendzin,	 Pema
Kundrol	Namgyel	and	Dzogchen	III	Ngedon	Tendzin	Zangpo.	The	last	named
was	 responsible	 for	 preparing	 the	 first	 xylographic	 edition	 of	
The	 Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	at	Dzogchen	Monastery	in	the
mid-eighteenth	century.
EDITIONS	AND	CONTENT	OF	
THE	GREAT	LIBERATION	BY
HEARING	IN	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATES
The	diverse	strands	of	the	lineage	stemming	from	Karma	Lingpa	and	Gyarawa,
summarised	above,	ensured	that	their	legacy	would	flourish	throughout	Tibet
and	in	the	neighbouring	sub-Himalayan	regions	of	Northern	Nepal,	Sikkim	and
Bhutan.	The	earliest	texts	which	these	spiritual	successions	imparted	through	the

generations	were	handwritten	manuscripts,	including	a	great	many	local	and
anonymous	supplements.	Yet,	as	Bryan	Cuevas	has	rightly	observed,	‘most	of
the	available	recensions	of	[Karma	Lingpa’s]	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
come	to	us	in	the	form	of	xylographic	prints	and	facsimile	reproductions	from
blocks	carved	only	in	the	last	two	centuries’.	Unfortunately,	the	scribal	errors
that	have	crept	into	many	of	these	‘standard’	editions	subsequently	acquired
great	currency.
At	present,	the	most	extensive	extant	version	of	the	
Peace	ful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
	is	not	a	block-print,	but	the
manuscript	version	from	the	library	of	the	late	
Kyabje
	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	who	in
the	1960s	had	his	scribe	prepare	an	elegant	three-volume	edition	on	the	basis	of
the	two	volumes	in	his	possession,	which	were	apparently	of	Katok	provenance.
This	 manuscript	 contains	 sixty-four	 distinct	 texts,	 which	 are	 arranged
sequentially	under	the	categories	of	history,	empowerment,	generation	stage,
perfection	stage,	introductions	(according	to	the	Great	Perfection),	path	of	skilful
means,	 and	 protector	 liturgies.	 Although	 it	 is	 the	 most	 extensive	 version
available,	this	manuscript	is	by	no	means	exhaustive	—	for	there	are	other,
smaller	published	compilations,	associated	with	Pelyul,	Dzogchen	and	Nedo,
containing	texts	that	are	excluded	from	the	larger	anthology.	However,	in	our
experience,	and	on	the	authority	of	Gene	Smith,	who	generously	made	the
Dudjom	manuscript	available	on	CD-ROM,	the	Dudjom	manuscript	is	far	more
accurate	than	the	many	Indian	and	Bhutanese	reprints	that	are	more	widely
available	and	have	provided	the	source	for	the	recent	partial	translations	of	
The
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
.	Even	the	illuminated
manuscript	on	which	Kazi	
Dawa	Samdup’s	1927	translation	is	based	appears	to
perpetuate	the	same	inaccuracies.	After	wrestling	with	the	scribal	errors,	lacunae
and	inconsistencies	that	fill	the	various	Indian	reprints	of	
The	Great	Liberation
by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	it	was	with	considerable	joy	and	relief
that	 we	 were	 finally	 able	 to	 clarify	 obscure	 readings	 and	 eliminate	 many
cumbersome	and	unnecessary	annotations	by	basing	our	translation	on	the	three-
volume	 Dudjom	 edition	 of	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 Natural
Liberation	of	Enlightened	Intention
.	Seldom	have	we	opted	for	readings	based
on	 the	 two	 Indian	 reprints	 of	
The	 Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing	 in	 the
Intermediate	 States
	 at	 our	 disposal,	 the	 Delhi	 and	 Varanasi	 photo-offset
publications,	and	when	we	have	done	so,	we	have	indicated	the	reason	for	our
choice	in	the	notes.	We	have	not,	however,	made	reference	to	the	new	Amdo
edition,	compiled	by	Khenpo	Dorje	and	just	published	in	Hong	Kong.

Readers	wishing	to	understand	the	precise	relationship	between	the	chapters
of	the	derivative	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	and	the
larger	cycle	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,	are	referred	to	Appendix	One,
where	the	correspondences	are	presented.
As	stated	above,	this	is	the	first	complete	English	translation	of	
The	Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	otherwise	known	to	the	outside
world	as	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
,	and	it	is	based	on	a	version	of	the
original	text	which	has	proven	to	be	far	more	accurate	than	those	used	in
previous	translations.	All	the	chapters	of	the	anthology	standardised	by	Nyima
Drakpa	and	later	published	in	woodblock	form	at	Dzogchen	Monastery	are
contained	in	this	book.	With	the	exception	of	Chapter	13,	Part	One,	which	may
well	 derive	 from	 the	 non-extant	
Lotus	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities
,	 and
Chapter	13,	Part	Two,	which	was	composed	by	Gyarawa	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso,
all	the	other	chapters	from	Nyima	Drakpa’s	compilation	appear	to	have	been
taken	from	the	original	treasure-cycle	of	Karma	Lingpa’s	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities
.
In	presenting	our	translation,	we	have	sought	to	order	the	chapters	according
to	the	meaningful	sequence	of	the	intermediate	states	that	arise	in	the	course	of
life	and	death,	and	therefore	the	order	of	the	chapters	in	this	translation	differs
from	the	arrangement	of	Nyima	Drakpa.	In	addition,	we	have	included	two
further	chapters	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	that	are	not	part	of	
The
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
.	Chapter	1,	outlining	the
preliminary	practices	of	meditation,	is	attributed	to	Nyinda	Choje	and	Nyinda
Ozer,	while	Chapter	10,	on	consciousness	transference,	derives	from	Karma
Lingpa’s	
Six	Guidebooks	of	the	Perfection	Stage
	of	meditation.	The	first	of	these
has	been	included	because	it	provides	an	essential	context	to	the	later	chapters,
and	the	instructions	on	consciousness	transference	have	been	included	because
they	are	specifically	mentioned	in	Chapter	11,	as	a	necessary	practice	related	to
the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death.

1
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind:	The	Four-session	Yoga
of	the	Preliminary	Practice
CONTEXT
In	its	original	Tibetan	this	preliminary	practice	is	beautifully	written	in
verse.	In	the	monasteries	and	lay	households	of	the	practitioners	of	this
cycle	of	teachings,	it	is	usually	sung	melodically	in	the	early	morning,
before	any	other	practice	or	activity	is	begun.	Often	the	young	monks
sing	the	opening	verses	of	this	poem	as	they	go	about	their	morning
duties.
When	engaging	in	a	preliminary	retreat,	it	is	recommended	that	this
meditation	is	done	every	day	in	four	sessions:	early	morning	till	dawn,
after	sunrise	until	just	before	noon,	from	afternoon	until	just	before
sunset,	and	from	sunset	until	late	evening.
The	practice	essentialises	the	‘four	common	or	outer	preliminaries’	and
the	‘five	uncommon	or	inner	preliminaries’,	which	are	described	in	the
glossary.	 It	 is	 recommended	 that	 the	 inner	 preliminary	 practices	 are
repeated	100,000	times	as	a	prerequisite	to	receiving	instruction	on	the
‘generation	 stage’	 practices	 of	 the	 Vehicle	 of	 Indestructible	 Reality
(
Vajrayāna
).
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind:	The	Four-
session	 Yoga	 which	 is	 a	 Spiritual	 Practice	 of	 the	 Vehicle	 of	 Indestructible
Reality,	the	Way	of	Secret	Mantras
,
1
	an	extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
It	would	be	excellent	if	one	were	to	train	one’s	mental	continuum	according	to
the	[following]	preliminary	practices	which	are	based	on	the	
Peace	ful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.

COMMON	PRELIMINARY	PRACTICE
O,	Alas!	Alas!	Fortunate	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
Do	not	be	oppressed	by	the	forces	of	ignorance	and	delusion!
But	rise	up	now	with	resolve	and	courage!
Entranced	by	ignorance,	from	beginningless	time	until	now,
You	have	had	[more	than]	enough	time	to	sleep.
So	do	not	slumber	any	longer,	but	strive	after	virtue	with	body,	speech	and
mind!
	
Are	you	oblivious	to	the	sufferings	of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death?
There	is	no	guarantee	that	you	will	survive,	even	past	this	very	day!
The	time	has	come	[for	you]	to	develop	perseverance	in	[your]	practice.
For,	at	this	singular	opportunity,	you	could	attain	the	everlasting	bliss	[of
nirvāṇa].
So	now	is	[certainly]	not	the	time	to	sit	idly,
But,	starting	with	[the	reflection	on]	death,	you	should	bring	your	practice	to
completion!
3
	
The	moments	of	our	life	are	not	expendable,
And	the	[possible]	circumstances	of	death	are	beyond	imagination.
If	you	do	not	achieve	an	undaunted	confident	security	now,
What	point	is	there	in	your	being	alive,	O	living	creature?
	
All	phenomena	are	[ultimately]	selfless,	empty,	and	free	from	conceptual
elaboration.
In	their	dynamic	they	resemble	an	illusion,	mirage,	dream,	or	reflected	image,
A	celestial	city,	an	echo,	a	reflection	of	the	moon	in	water,	a	bubble,	an	optical
illusion,	or	an	intangible	emanation.
You	should	know	that	all	things	of	cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa
Accord	[in	nature]	with	these	ten	similes	of	illusory	phenomena.
	
All	phenomena	are	naturally	uncreated.
They	neither	abide	nor	cease,	neither	come	nor	go.
They	 are	 without	 objective	 referent,	 signless,	 ineffable,	 and	 free	 from

thought.
4
The	time	has	come	for	this	truth	to	be	realised!
	
Homage	to	the	spiritual	teachers!
Homage	to	the	meditational	deities!
Homage	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s!
O,	Alas!	Alas!	How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	living	beings,	tortured
by	their	past	actions,
[Who	are	drowning]	in	this	deep	chasm,	the	engulfing	ocean	of	their	past
actions!
Such	is	the	nature	of	fluctuating	cyclic	existence!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	this	ocean	of	sufferings	may	run	dry!
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	who	are	skill-less,
5
Those	who	are	tortured	by	ignorance	and	past	actions,
Those	who	indulge	in	actions	conducive	to	suffering	—
Even	though	they	desire	happiness!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	the	obscuration	of	dissonant	mental	states	and
past	actions	may	be	purified!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	the	ignorant	and	the	deluded,
[Bound]	in	this	confining	dungeon	of	egotistical	attachment	and	the	subject-
object	dichotomy,
Who,	like	wild	game,	are	trapped	in	this	snare,	time	after	time!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	cyclic	existence	may	be	stirred	to	its	depths!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	beings	who	endlessly	revolve	[in	the
cycle	of	existence],
As	if	[circling]	perpetually	[on]	the	rim	of	a	water-wheel,
In	this	six-dimensional	city	of	imprisoning	past	actions!
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	the	womb	entrances	to	the	six	classes	of	existence
may	be	barred!
	
We	who	are	fearless	and	hard-hearted,	despite	having	seen	so	many	sufferings
of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death,
Are	wasting	our	human	lives,	endowed	with	freedom	and	opportunity,
6
	on	the
paths	of	distraction.

Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	we	may	[continuously]	remember	impermanence
and	death!
	
Since	we	do	not	recognise	that	impermanent	[things]	are	unreliable,
Still,	even	now,	we	remain	attached,	clinging	to	this	cycle	of	existence.
Wishing	for	happiness,	we	pass	our	human	lives	in	suffering.
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	attachment	to	cyclic	existence	may	be	reversed!
	
Our	impermanent	environment	will	be	destroyed	by	fire	and	water,
7
The	impermanent	sentient	beings	within	it	will	endure	the	severing	of	body
and	mind.
The	seasons	of	the	year:	summer,	winter,	autumn	and	spring,	themselves
[exemplify]	impermanence.
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	disillusionment	[with	conditioned	existence]	may
arise	from	the	depths	[of	our	hearts]!
	
Last	year,	this	year,	the	waxing	and	waning	moons,
The	days,	nights,	and	indivisible	time	moments	are	all	impermanent.
If	we	reflect	carefully,	we	too	are	face	to	face	with	death.
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	we	may	become	resolute	in	our	practice!
	
Though	this	[body]	endowed	with	freedom	and	opportunity	is	extremely	hard
to	find,
When	the	Lord	of	Death
8
	approaches	in	the	semblance	of	disease,
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	who,	bereft	of	the	[sacred]	teachings,
Return	empty-handed	[from	this	life]!
Grant	your	blessing	so	that	[a	recognition	of]	urgency	may	grow	in	our	minds!
	
Alas!	Alas!	O	Precious	Jewel,	embodiment	of	compassion!
Since	you,	the	Conqueror,	are	endowed	with	a	loving	heart,
Grant	your	blessing,	so	that	we	and	the	six	classes	of	beings
May	be	liberated,	right	now,	from	the	sufferings	of	cyclic	existence!
UNCOMMON	PRELIMINARY	PRACTICE

Refuge
(Then,	the	outer,	inner,	and	secret	refuges	should	be	adopted	in	the	following
way:)
	
Outer	Refuge
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	spiritual	teachers
Whose	enlightened	intention,	throughout	the	past,	present	and	future,
Is	uninterruptedly	directed	towards	living	beings,
The	infinite	sentient	beings	of	the	three	world	systems	and	six	classes.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	[perfect]	buddhas,
The	Transcendent	Ones	Gone	to	Bliss	of	the	ten	directions	and	four	times,
Foremost	of	humankind,	adorned	by	the	major	and	minor	marks,
Whose	enlightened	activities	are	inexhaustible,	and	as	vast	as	space.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	sacred	teachings,
Including	the	doctrines	of	the	ultimate	truth,	quiescent	and	desireless,
The	irreversible	path
9
	of	the	three	vehicles,
And	the	transmissions,	esoteric	instructions,	and	treatises
Of	the	transmitted	precepts	and	treasures.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	communities	[of	monks	and	nuns],
Who	abide	on	the	unerring	path,	forming	a	field	of	all	supreme	merits,
10
Together	with	the	assembly	of	Sublime	Ones,	set	apart	from	the	stains	of
dissonant	mental	states,
And	the	supreme	upholders	of	the	Teaching:	bodhisattvas,	pious	attendants,
and	hermit	buddhas.
	
Inner	Refuge
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	spiritual	teachers,
[Embodying]	the	essential	nature	of	the	buddhas	of	the	three	times,
The	masters	of	all	the	secret	and	unsurpassed	maṇḍalas,

Who	guide	all	living	beings	with	their	blessings	and	compassion.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	meditational	deities,
Who,	even	though	[they	remain	unmoving	as]	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
Uncreated	and	free	from	the	limits	of	conceptual	elaboration,
Emanate	in	peaceful	and	wrathful	forms	for	the	sake	of	living	beings,
And	confer	the	supreme	and	common	accomplishments.
	
I	bow	down	to	and	take	refuge	in	the	assembly	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
Who,	moving	with	the	energy	of	compassion	through	the	space	of	reality,
Grant	supreme	bliss	[as	they	arise]	from	their	pure	abodes,
And	bestow	accomplishments	upon	those	who	keep	their	commitments.
	
Secret	Refuge
	
From	within	a	state	free	from	grasping	and	beyond	intellect,
I	take	refuge	in	the	nature	of	the	great	expanse	of	sameness	and	perfection,
11
Atemporal	emptiness,	free	from	conceptual	elaboration,
Primordially	pure	in	essence,	natural	expression	and	compassionate	energy.
	
From	within	[a	state	which	is]	non-conceptual,	naturally	radiant	and	stark,
I	take	refuge	in	the	primordial	embodiment	of	the	five	buddha-bodies,
Spontaneously	and	naturally	present,
[Abiding]	in	the	maṇḍala	of	the	[unique]	seminal	point,
Which	 is	 [the	 union	 of]	 expanse	 and	 awareness,	 and	 of	 radiance	 and
emptiness,
The	indestructible	chain	of	inner	radiance,	that	is	intrinsic	awareness.
	
Throughout	the	three	times,	beginningless	and	endless,
I	take	refuge	in	the	Compassionate	Ones,
Unimpeded,	naturally	expressive,	and	all-pervasive,
The	unimpededly	arising	and	subsiding	rays	of	light,
Which	emanate	through	the	expressive	power	of	awareness,
Dispelling,	non-conceptually,	the	darkness	in	the	minds	of	living	beings.

The	Generation	of	an	Altruistic	Intention
(Then,	the	altruistic	intention	of	the	Greater	Vehicle	should	be	generated	in	the
following	way:)
	
Even	though	all	phenomena	are	empty	and	selfless,
Sentient	beings	fail	to	realise	this.	Alas!	How	needing	of	compassion	are	they!
So	 that	 all	 those	 who	 are	 the	 focus	 of	 our	 compassion	 may	 attain
enlightenment,
I	must	rouse	my	body,	speech	and	mind	to	[the	practice	of]	virtue!
	
For	the	benefit	of	all	sentient	beings	of	the	six	classes,
From	now	until	enlightenment	is	attained,
Not	just	for	my	own	sake	but	for	the	benefit	of	all,
I	must	generate	the	mind	[aspiring]	to	supreme	enlightenment!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	those	bereft	of	the	[sacred]	teachings,
Who	have	ensnared	themselves	within	the	unfathomable	ocean	of	suffering.
So	that	all	those	who	are	the	focus	of	our	compassion	may	be	established	in
happiness,
I	must	generate	the	mind	[aspiring]	to	supreme	enlightenment!
	
I	myself	and	all	infinite	sentient	beings
Are	primordially	of	the	nature	of	buddhahood.
So	that	we	may	[all]	become	supreme	embodiments,	who	know	this	to	be	so,
I	must	generate	the	mind	[aspiring]	to	supreme	enlightenment!
	
The	ocean	of	mundane	cyclic	existence	is	like	an	illusion.
All	compounded	things	lack	permanence.
Their	essence	is	empty	and	selfless,
But	these	naive	beings	[right	here]	who	do	not	realise	this	to	be	so
Roam	through	cyclic	existence,	[driven	on]	by	the	twelve	links	of	dependent
origination.
So	that	all	beings	gripped	in	this	quagmire	of	name	and	form	may	attain
buddhahood,
12
I	must	rouse	my	body,	speech,	and	mind	to	[the	practice	of]	virtue!

	
I	take	refuge	[from	now]	until	enlightenment,
In	the	Buddha,	the	[sacred]	teachings	and	supreme	assembly.
Through	the	merit	of	practising	generosity	and	the	other	[perfections],
May	I	attain	buddhahood	for	the	sake	of	[all]	living	beings!
May	I	become	a	spiritual	teacher,	[able	to]	guide	infinite	sentient	beings,
As	many	as	there	are,	without	exception!
	
(Then,	one	should	meditate	on	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations	as	follows:)
	
May	all	sentient	beings	be	endowed	with	happiness!
May	they	all	be	separated	from	suffering	and	its	causes!
May	they	be	endowed	with	joy,	free	from	suffering!
May	they	abide	in	equanimity,	free	from	attachment	or	aversion!
Purification	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through	the	Repeated	Recitation
of	the	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	[of	Vajrasattva]
(This	should	be	done	in	the	context	of	the	following	visualisation:)
	
At	the	crown	of	my	head,	on	a	lotus	moon	cushion,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	[resplendent]	in	the	form	of	Vajrasattva.
His	body	is	translucent,	like	crystal,	and	at	his	heart,
[Resting]	on	a	moon-disc,	is	a	syllable	HŪṂ,	surrounded	by	the	Hundred-
syllable	Mantra.
13
A	stream	of	nectar	then	descends	through	my	crown	fontanelle,
14
Purifying	 my	 violations	 [of	 the	 commitments],	 my	 negativities	 and
obscurations.
	
May	Vajrasattva,	glorious	transcendent	one,
Anoint	me	at	this	very	moment
With	the	nectar	stream	of	pristine	cognition,
So	that	the	negativities	and	obscurations
Of	myself	and	all	sentient	beings,	without	exception,	are	purified.
	

OṂ	 VAJRASATTVA	 SAMAYAMANUPĀLAYA	 VAJRASATTVA
TVENOPATIṢṬHA	DṚḌHO	ME	BHAVA	SUPOṢYO	ME	BHAVA	SUTOṢYO
ME	BHAVA	ANURAKTO	ME	BHAVA	SARVASIDDHIṂ	ME	PRAYACCHA
SARVAKARMASU	CA	ME	CITTAṂ	ŚREYAḤ	KURU	HŪṂ	HAHAHAHA
HO	 BHAGAVĀ̄N	 SARVA	 TATHĀGATA	 VAJRA	 MĀ	 ME	 MUÑCA
VAJRABHAVA	MAHĀ̄SAMAYASATTVA	ĀḤ
15
	
Owing	to	my	ignorance,	delusion,	and	confusion,
I	have	transgressed	the	boundaries	of	the	commitments,
which	I	should	have	guarded.
O	my	protector	and	spiritual	teacher,	be	my	refuge!
	
You	who	are	the	supreme	and	glorious	Vajra-holder,
16
Embodying	great	compassion	and	love,
O	Foremost	of	beings,	be	our	refuge.
Assist	us	to	purify	and	cleanse,	without	exception,	this	mass	of	flaws	—
Our	negativities,	obscurations,	transgressions,	and	downfalls.
	
By	this	virtuous	activity,
May	I	swiftly	attain	[the	state	of]	Vajrasattva,	now,
And	may	all	sentient	beings,	without	exception,
Be	swiftly	established	in	that	same	state!
May	we	become	exactly	like	you,	Vajrasattva,
Exactly	resembling	you	in	body,	retinue,	lifespan,	fields,
And	in	your	supreme	and	exquisite	major	marks.
17
The	Maṇḍala	Offering
(Then	present	the	maṇḍala	of	offerings	in	the	following	way:)
	
OṂ	VAJRA	BHŪMI	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
18
The	base	transforms	into	a	powerful	ground	of	gold.
19
OṂ	VAJRA	REKHE	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
20
The	outer	periphery	becomes	a	jewelled	fence	of	iron	mountains,

And	at	the	centre	is	Mount	Sumeru,	king	of	mountains,
Majestic	and	formed	from	the	five	precious	substances,
Exquisitely	beautiful	in	shape,	and	delightful	to	behold,
Encircled	by	seven	[concentric]	golden	mountain	ranges,
And	seven	[intervening]	emanational	oceans.
To	the	east	is	the	continent	Viratdeha,
And	to	the	south	is	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,
The	west	is	adorned	by	Aparagodan
ῑ
ya,
And	to	the	north	is	Uttarakuru.
[To	either	side	of	these	continents	are]	the	eight	subcontinents:
Deha	and	Videha	[to	the	east],
Cāmara	and	Aparacāmara	[to	the	south],
Sāṭhā	and	Uttaramantriṇa	[to	the	west],
And	Kurava	and	Kaurava	[to	the	north].
I	offer	this	[world-system],	along	with	the	sun,	moon,	Rahu,	Ketu,
21
And	the	luxuriant	resources	and	riches	of	gods	and	humans,
To	you,	my	precious	spiritual	teachers,	and	to	your	retinues.
Through	your	compassion,	please	accept	them	for	the	benefit	of	all	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀṂ	HŪṂ
22
To	 my	 precious	 spiritual	 teachers	 and	 the	 fields	 of	 the	 Buddha-body	 of
Emanation,
I	offer	all	the	inestimable	resources	of	gods	and	humans,
Within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	animate	and	inanimate	trichiliocosm,
[In	the	form	of]	a	dense	cloud	of	offerings,	as	numerous	as	atomic	particles,
Together	with	Mount	Sumeru	and	its	continents.
Please	accept	[these	offerings],	with	compassion	and	love!
May	all	beings	be	born	into	the	fields	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
	
To	my	precious	spiritual	teachers	and	the	fields	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource,
I	offer	this	perfect	purity	of	the	sensory	spectra	and	sensory	activity	fields,
Adorned	by	the	five	sense-faculties,	radiant	and	brilliant,
Within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	pure	energy	channels	of	my	body.

Please	accept	[these	offerings],	with	compassion	and	love!
May	 all	 beings	 be	 born	 into	 the	 fields	 of	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
	
To	my	precious	spiritual	teachers	and	the	field	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
I	offer	this	primordially	pure	and	innate	pristine	cognition
That	abides	within	the	immeasurable	palace	of	the	pure	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	which	is	mind’s	actual	nature,
23
Free	from	an	objective	referent,	empty,	radiant,	and	free	from	subjective
apprehension.
Please	accept	[these	offerings],	with	compassion	and	love!
May	all	beings	be	born	into	the	field	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
By	offering	this	exquisite	and	pleasing	maṇḍala,
May	no	obstacles	arise	on	the	path	to	enlightenment!
May	the	enlightened	intention	of	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and
future,	be	realised,
May	I	neither	be	bewildered	in	migratory	existence,
Nor	lulled	by	the	solitary	quiescence	[of	nirvāṇa]!
But	may	I	liberate	beings	throughout	the	expanse	of	space!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	MAHĀ	GURU	DEVA	ḌĀKINĪ	RATNA	MAṆḌALA	PŪJĀ
MEGHA	Ā	HŪṂ
24
Prayer	to	the	Lineage	Teachers
(Then,	in	order	to	cultivate	union	with	the	spiritual	teacher,	the	prayer	to	the
lineage	should	be	recited	as	follows:)
	
I	pray	to	the	[direct]	intentional	lineage	of	the	conquerors:
To	Samantabhadra,	primordial	lord,	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
To	the	Conqueror	Vajradhara,	embodiment	of	the	sixth	[enlightened	family],

And	to	Vajrasattva,	foremost	of	guides,	the	supreme	buddha-mind.
	
I	pray	to	the	[symbolic]	lineage	of	the	awareness	holders:
To	the	awareness	holder	Prahevajra,	supreme	among	emanations,
To	the	spiritual	teacher	Sr
ῑ
	Simha,	supreme	son	of	the	conquerors,
To	the	undying	Padmākara,	established	in	the	Buddha-body	of	Indestructible
Reality,
And	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
	[Yeshe]	Tshogyalma,	worthy	recipient	of	the	secret	mantras.
	
I	pray	to	the	aural	lineage	of	[authoritative]	personages:
To	Karma	Lingpa,	master	of	the	profound	treasures,
To	the	one	named	[Nyinda]	Choje,	supreme	son	of	his	buddha-mind,
And	to	the	one	named	Sūryacandra	[Nyinda	Ozer],	lord	of	living	beings
during	this	degenerate	age.
	
I	pray	to	the	assembled	deities	of	the	three	roots:
To	all	the	genuine	spiritual	teachers	of	the	core	lineage,
Who	form	the	connecting	links	[of	this	transmission],
25
To	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	meditational	deities,	in	whom	appearance	and
emptiness	are	indivisible,
And	to	the	oceanic	assembly	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s	and	oath-bound	protectors	of	the
[sacred]	teachings!
	
O	you	spiritual	teachers	who	uphold	the	lineage	of	the	oral	transmission,
26
And	train	each	according	to	his	or	her	needs!
If	your	teaching	were	to	enter	into	decline,
The	yogins	of	this	era	would	be	[utterly]	disheartened.
Please,	therefore,	continue	to	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic
existence!
	
As	we	call	out	to	you	with	mournful	and	tormented	cries,
Bring	to	mind,	now,	the	strict	vows	which	you	made	in	the	past!
27
Reveal	your	faces	from	the	expanse	of	space,	endowed	with	major	and	minor
marks!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!

Let	your	Brahmā	voice	reverberate	like	a	thousand	peals	of	thunder!
28
Open	[wide]	the	portals	to	the	treasury	of	your	buddha-mind!
Pour	out	the	light	rays	of	your	discriminative	awareness	and	compassion!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Liberate	now,	without	exception,	all	beings	of	this	final	era!
29
Anoint	[us]	now	with	the	river	of	the	four	pure	empowerments!
Liberate	now	the	four	continua,	bewildered	by	dissonant	mental	states!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Grant	now	the	fruitional	attainment	of	the	four	buddha-bodies	of	Those	Gone
to	Bliss!
May	I	become	a	spiritual	teacher,	[able]	to	guide	all	the	infinite	sentient
beings,
Who	have	been	my	parents,	throughout	space,	without	exception!
Please	guide	all	beings	from	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Receiving	the	Four	Empowerments
(Then	the	meditation	to	be	adopted	while	receiving	the	four	empowerments
should	be	as	follows:
30
)
	
From	the	crown	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,
A	white	syllable	OṂ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	mid-point	between	my	eyebrows,
The	vase	empowerment	is	thus	received	and	the	obscurations	of	the	body	are
purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-body!
	
From	the	throat	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,
A	red	syllable	ĀḤ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	sense	faculty	of	my	tongue,
The	secret	empowerment	is	thus	received	and	the	obscurations	of	speech	are
purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-speech!
	
From	the	heart	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,

A	blue	syllable	HŪṂ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	centre	of	my	heart,
The	empowerment	of	pristine	cognition	is	thus	received,	and	the	obscurations
of	mind	are	purified.
Please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-mind!
	
From	the	navel	of	the	spiritual	teacher	in	union	with	consort,
A	red	syllable	HRĪḤ,	[radiating]	rays	of	light,
Descends	into	the	centre	of	my	navel,
The	obscurations	which	[mundanely]	differentiate	between	body,	speech	and
mind	are	purified,
And	the	fourth	empowerment	of	indivisible	coemergence	is	received.
	
O	glorious	and	precious	root	spiritual	teacher!
Be	indivisibly	present,	[seated]	on	the	pistil	of	a	lotus	within	my	heart	for
ever!
Through	your	great	kindness,	favour	me	with	your	acceptance,
And	please	confer	[upon	me]	the	accomplishments	of	buddha-body,	speech
and	mind!
	
May	we	become	exactly	like	you,	glorious	spiritual	teacher!
Exactly	resembling	you	in	body,	retinue,	lifespan,	fields,
And	in	your	supreme	and	excellent	major	marks.
	
These	verses	forming	the	preliminary	practice	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	
Liberation	 through
[Recognition	 of]	 Enlightened	 Intention
	 may	 be	 applied	 as	 a	 supplementary
method	in	the	context	of	mental	purification.
This	spiritual	practice	of	the	unsurpassed	Greater	Vehicle	(Mahāyāna)	is	an
oral	teaching	of	[Nyinda]	Choje	Lingpa,	the	eldest	son	of	the	treasure-finder
Karma	Lingpa;	and	it	was	committed	to	writing	by	Guru	Sūryacandraraśmi	[i.e.
Nyinda	Ozer].

2
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation,	without	Renunciation	of	the	Three	Poisons
CONTEXT
This	prayer	to	the	spiritual	teacher	is	generally	recited	immediately	after
the	
Preliminary	Practice
.	It	is	also	recommended	that	it	be	recited	at	the
beginning	of	any	ritual,	or	when	thinking	of	the	spiritual	teacher	or
whenever	the	practitioner	is	about	to	enter	into	periods	of	meditation.
A	correct	perception	of	the	spiritual	teacher	is	considered	vital	for	all
practitioners	of	the	Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality	(
Vajrayāna
).	Further,
it	is	considered	essential	that	a	practitioner	receive	spiritual	inspiration,
as	transmitted	through	an	unbroken	lineage	of	masters,	from	a	living
teacher.	First,	however,	before	accepting	anyone	as	a	spiritual	teacher,	it
is	also	regarded	as	essential	that	the	practitioner	examine	and	scrutinise
the	prospective	teacher	over	a	long	period	of	time	and	accept	him	or	her
as	a	qualified	teacher	only	when	it	is	certain	that	the	person	meets	the
requirements	of	a	spiritual	teacher	as	set	out	in	the	authoritative	sacred
texts.	Then,	if	they	are	sure	that	their	own	motivation	is	sincere,	students
should	 follow	 the	 advice	 of	 their	 chosen	 spiritual	 teacher	 with
incontrovertible	devotion.
Ultimately,	the	inspiration	that	is	requested	from	the	spiritual	teacher	is
coming	from	the	purity	of	the	practitioner’s	own	perception,	altruistic
intention	and	confidence.
Herein	is	contained	
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher,	[Embodiment
of]	 the	 Three	 Buddha-bodies,	 [entitled]	 Natural	 Liberation,	 without
Renunciation	of	the	Three	Poisons
,
1
	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	

In	the	palace	of	reality’s	expanse,	pure	and	pervasive,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	—
Uncreated	and	free	from	conceptual	elaboration.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.
I	request	the	primordially	pure	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
3
So	that	naturally	arising	pristine	cognition
Is	uncontrived	and	spontaneously	present,
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	ignorance	and	delusion.
	
In	the	palace	of	great	bliss,	which	is	pristine	cognition,	radiant	and	pure,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	—
Unimpeded	and	supremely	blissful.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.
I	request	the	spontaneously	present	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,
4
So	that	intrinsic	awareness,	which	is	pristine	cognition,
Is	naturally	liberated	in	supreme	bliss,
5
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	desire	and	clinging.
In	the	palace	of	the	lotus,	untainted	and	pure,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	—
Naturally	arising	in	unlimited	forms,	beyond	determination.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.
I	request	the	naturally	liberating	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,
So	that	intrinsic	awareness,	which	is	naturally	manifesting
Pristine	cognition,	naturally	radiates,
6
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	discordant	views	and	aversion.
	
In	the	palace	of	intrinsic	awareness,	the	genuine	inner	radiance,
Is	my	spiritual	teacher,	[the	unity	of]	the	three	buddha-bodies	—	Beyond
spatial	delineation,	and	supremely	blissful.
To	you,	I	pray	with	fervent	devotion.

I	request	the	supremely	blissful	self-empowerment,
The	blessings	of	the	Three	Buddha-bodies,
So	that	naturally	arising	pristine	cognition
Is	spontaneously	present	as	the	three	buddha-bodies,
7
Through	natural	liberation,
Without	renunciation	of	the	subject-object	dichotomy.
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	suffering	sentient	beings,	right	here,
Who	are	driven	on	through	cyclic	existence	by	delusion	and	confusion	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	that	their	own	mind
Is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	free	from	extremes!
May	they	all	actualise	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	mistakenly	prejudiced	sentient	beings,	right
here,
Who	are	driven	on	through	cyclic	existence	by	attachment	and	craving	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	that	their	own	awareness
Is	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	imbued	with	supreme	bliss!
May	they	all	actualise	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource!
How	needing	of	compassion	are	sentient	beings	with	discordant	views,	right
here,
Who	 are	 driven	 on	 through	 cyclic	 existence	 by	 aversion	 and	 dualistic
perception	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	that	their	own	mind
Is	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,	arising	and	subsiding	[naturally]!
May	they	all	actualise	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation!
	
How	needing	of	compassion	are	all	unenlightened	living	beings,	right	here,
Who,	as	a	result	of	grasping,	are	obscured	by	dissonant	mental	states	and
[subtle	obstructions	to]	knowledge	—
Because	they	do	not	understand	[that	their	own	mind]
Is	indivisible	from	the	three	buddha-bodies!
May	they	all	actualise	the	three	buddha-bodies!
	
These	 verses	 forming	
A	 Prayer	 for	 Union	 with	 the	 Spiritual	 Teacher,
[Embodiment	 of]	 the	 Three	 Buddha-bodies,	 [entitled]	 Natural	 Liberation,

without	 Renunciation	 of	 the	 Three	 Poisons
,	 which	 are	 an	 extract	 from	 the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
,	were	composed	by
Padmākara,	the	preceptor	from	Oḍḍiyāna.
May	[the	influence	of]	this	sacred	teaching	not	be	extinguished	until	cyclic
existence	has	been	emptied!
8
This	prayer	was	brought	forth	from	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembles	a
dancing	god,	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa.

3
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
CONTEXT
According	to	this	cycle	of	teachings,	the	circle	of	birth	and	death	can	be
seen	as	being	composed	of	six	intermediate	states.	These	six	modalities
of	existence:	our	waking	living	state,	dreaming,	meditation,	the	time	of
death,	and	the	two	successive	phases	of	the	after-death	state	are	defined
in	the	glossary.
This	poem	emphasises	the	centrally	important	perspective	that	relates
to	 each	 of	 these	 states.	 It	 is	 recommended	 that	 practitioners	 should
memorise	these	verses	and	recite	them	repeatedly,	while	reflecting	on
their	meaning,	throughout	their	lives.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
.
1
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Conquerors,	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
	
The	root	verses	concerning	the	six	intermediate	states	are	as	follows:
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	living
2
	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	laziness,	for	which	there	is	no	time	in	this	life,
I	must	enter	the	undistracted	path	of	study,	reflection	and	meditation.
Taking	perceptual	experience	and	[the	nature	of]	mind	as	the	path,
I	must	cultivate	actualisation	of	the	three	buddha-bodies.
Now,	having	obtained	a	precious	human	body,	this	one	time,
I	do	not	have	the	luxury	of	remaining	on	a	distracted	path.
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	dreams	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	the	corpse-like,	insensitive	sleep	of	delusion,
I	must	enter,	free	from	distracting	memories,	the	state	of	the	abiding	nature	of

reality.
Cultivating	[the	experience	of]	inner	radiance,
Through	the	recognition,	emanation,	and	transformation	of	dreams,
I	must	not	sleep	like	a	beast,
But	 cherish	 the	 experiential	 cultivation	 which	 mingles	 sleep	 with	 actual
[realisation].
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	meditative	concentration	arises	before
me,
Renouncing	the	mass	of	distractions	and	confusions,
I	must	undistractedly	enter	a	state,
Which	is	devoid	of	subjective	apprehension,	and	free	from	the	[two]	extremes,
And	attain	stability	in	the	stages	of	generation	and	perfection.
At	this	moment,	having	renounced	activity,
And	having	attained	a	singular	[concentration],
I	must	not	fall	under	the	sway	of	bewildering	mental	afflictions!
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
3
	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	[all]	attachment,	yearning	and	subjective	apprehension	in	every
respect,
I	must	undistractedly	enter	the	path,	on	which	the	oral	teachings	are	clearly
understood,
And	eject	my	own	awareness	into	the	uncreated	expanse	of	space.
Immediately	upon	separation	from	this	compounded	body	of	flesh	and	blood,
I	must	know	[this	body]	to	be	like	a	transient	illusion.
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
4
	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	the	merest	sense	of	awe,	terror	or	fear,
I	must	recognise	all	that	arises	to	be	awareness,	manifesting	naturally	of	itself.
Knowing	[such	sounds,	lights	and	rays]	to	be	visionary	phenomena	of	the
intermediate	state,
At	this	moment,	having	reached	this	critical	point,
I	must	not	fear	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	which	manifest
naturally!
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth
5
	arises	before	me,
I	must	with	one-pointed	intention	concentrate	my	mind,

And	resolutely	connect	with	the	residual	potency	of	my	virtuous	past	actions.
I	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrance	and	call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal.
This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are	imperative.
I	must	give	up	all	jealousy	and	meditate	on	my	spiritual	teacher	with	consort.
	
From	the	mouth	of	the	accomplished	masters	come	these	words:
‘O,	[you],	with	your	mind	far	away,	thinking	that	death	will	not	come,
Entranced	by	the	pointless	activities	of	this	life,
If	you	were	to	return	empty-handed	now,	would	not	your	[life’s]	purpose	have
been	[utterly]	confused?
Recognise	 what	 it	 is	 that	 you	 truly	 need!	 It	 is	 a	 sacred	 teaching	 [for
liberation]!
So,	should	you	not	practise	this	divine	[sacred]	teaching,	beginning	from	this
very	moment?’
	
And	it	is	also	said,
‘If	I	choose	not	to	take	the	oral	teachings	of	the	spiritual	teacher	to	heart,
Am	I	not	the	deceiver	of	myself?’
	
This	completes	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
.

4
The	Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through
Naked	Perception
CONTEXT
This	chapter	is	the	essence	of	the	esoteric	instruction	by	which	the
student	is	introduced	to	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind.	Prior	to	entering	into
this	practice,	which	focuses	directly	on	the	nature	of	mind	itself,	this
introduction	should	be	received	from	an	accomplished	lineage	holder.
Then,	whilst	in	solitary	retreat,	it	is	recommended	that	this	text	be	read
repeatedly	as	a	guide	between	meditation	sessions.
Herein	is	contained	
The	Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through
Naked	 Perception
,
1
	 [which	 is	 an	 extract]	 from	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
Homage	to	the	deities	[embodying]	the	three	buddha-bodies,	who	are	the	natural
radiance	of	awareness.
	
[Here],	I	shall	present	the	teaching	[known	as]	
The	Introduction	to	Awareness:
Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
,	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	 through	 [Recognition	 of]	 Enlightened	 Intention.
	 Thus,	 shall	 I
introduce	[to	you	the	nature	of]	intrinsic	awareness.	So	contemplate	it	well,	O
Fortunate	Child	of	Buddha	nature.
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya
[THE	IMPORTANCE	OF	THE	INTRODUCTION	TO
AWARENESS]

EMAHO!
Though	the	single	[nature	of]	mind,	which	completely	pervades	both	cyclic
existence	and	nirvāṇa,
Has	been	naturally	present	from	the	beginning,	you	have	not	recognised	it.
Even	though	its	radiance	and	awareness	have	never	been	interrupted,
You	have	not	yet	encountered	its	true	face.
Even	though	it	arises	unimpededly	in	every	facet	[of	existence],
You	have	not	as	yet	recognised	[this	single	nature	of	mind].
In	order	that	this	[single]	nature	might	be	recognised	by	you,
The	Conquerors	of	the	three	times	have	taught	an	inconceivably	[vast	number
of	practices],
Including	the	eighty-four	thousand	aspects	of	the	[sacred]	teachings.
Yet,	[despite	this	diversity],	not	even	one	of	these	[teachings]	has	been	given
by	the	Conquerors,
Outside	the	context	of	an	understanding	of	this	nature!
3
[And	even]	though	there	are	inestimable	volumes	of	sacred	writings,	equally
vast	as	the	limits	of	space,
Actually,	[these	teachings	can	be	succinctly	expressed	in]	a	few	words,
4
which	are	the	introduction	to	awareness.
	
Here	[is]	the	direct	[face	to	face]	introduction
To	the	enlightened	intention	of	the	Conquerors.
Here	is	the	method	for	entering	[into	actual	reality],
[In	this	very	moment],	without	reference	to	past	or	future	[events].
[THE	ACTUAL	INTRODUCTION	TO	AWARENESS]
KYE	HO!
O	fortunate	children,	listen	to	these	words!
The	term	‘mind’	is	commonplace	and	widely	used,
Yet	there	are	those	who	do	not	understand	[its	meaning],
Those	who	falsely	understand	it,	those	who	partially	understand	it,
And	those	who	have	not	quite	understood	its	genuine	reality.
Thus	there	has	arisen	an	inconceivably	vast	number	of	assertions	[as	to	the
nature	of	mind],

Posited	by	[the	various]	philosophical	systems.
5
	
Further,	since	ordinary	persons	do	not	understand	[the	meaning	of	the	term
‘mind’],
And	do	not	intuitively	recognise	its	nature,
They	continue	to	roam	through	the	six	classes	of	sentient	[rebirth]	within	the
three	world-systems,
And	consequently	experience	suffering.
6
This	is	the	fault	of	not	understanding	this	intrinsic	nature	of	mind.
	
Even	though	pious	attendants	and	hermit	buddhas	claim	that	they	understand
[this	single	nature	of	mind]	as	the	partial	absence	of	self,
7
They	do	not	understand	it	exactly	as	it	is.
Furthermore,	 being	 fettered	 by	 opinions	 held	 in	 accordance	 with	 their
respective	literatures	and	philosophical	systems,
8
There	are	those	who	do	not	perceive	the	inner	radiance	[directly]:
The	pious	attendants	and	hermit	buddhas	are	obscured	[in	this	respect]	by
their	attachment	to	the	subject-object	dichotomy.
The	 adherents	 of	 Madhyamaka	 are	 obscured	 by	 their	 attachment	 to	 the
extremes	of	the	two	truths.
The	 practitioners	 of	 Kriyātantra	 and	 Yogatantra	 are	 obscured	 by	 their
attachment	to	the	extremes	of	ritual	service	and	attainment.
9
The	practitioners	of	Mahāyoga	and	Anuyoga	are	obscured	by	their	attachment
to	[the	extremes	of]	space	and	awareness.
10
All	these	[practitioners]	stray	from	the	point	because	they	polarise	the	non-
dual	reality,
And	since	they	fail	to	unify	[these	extremes]	in	non-duality,	they	do	not	attain
buddhahood.
Thus,	all	of	those	beings	continue	to	roam	in	cyclic	existence,
Because	they	persistently	engage	in	[forms	of]	renunciation,
And	in	acts	of	rejection	and	acceptance	with	regard	to	their	own	minds,
Where	[in	reality]	cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa	are	inseparable.
	
Therefore,	one	should	abandon	all	constructed	teachings,
And	all	[unnatural]	states	free	from	activity,

And,	 by	 virtue	 of	 this	
[Introduction	 to]	 Awareness:	 Natural	 Liberation
through	Naked	Perception
,	which	is	presented	here,
One	should	realise	all	things	in	the	context	of	this	great	natural	liberation.
So	it	is	that	all	[enlightened	attributes]	are	brought	to	completion	within	the
Great	Perfection.
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya
[SYNONYMS	FOR	MIND]
As	for	this	apparent	and	distinct	[phenomenon]	which	is	called	‘mind’:
In	terms	of	existence,	it	has	no	[inherent]	existence	whatsoever.
In	terms	of	origination,	it	is	the	source	of	the	diverse	joys	and	sorrows	of
cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa,
In	terms	of	[philosophical]	opinion,	it	is	subject	to	opinions	in	accordance
with	the	eleven	vehicles.
In	terms	of	designation,	it	has	an	inconceivable	number	of	distinct	names:
Some	call	it	‘the	nature	of	mind’,	the	‘nature	of	mind	itself’,
Some	eternalists	give	it	the	name	‘self’,
Pious	attendants	call	it	‘selflessness	of	the	individual’,
11
Cittamātrins	call	it	‘mind’,
Some	call	it	the	‘Perfection	of	Discriminative	Awareness’,
Some	call	it	the	‘Nucleus	of	the	Sugata’,
Some	call	it	the	‘Great	Seal’,
Some	call	it	the	‘Unique	Seminal	Point’,
Some	call	it	the	‘Expanse	of	Reality’,
Some	call	it	the	‘Ground-of-all’,
And	some	call	it	‘ordinary	[unfabricated	consciousness]’.
[THE	THREE	CONSIDERATIONS]
The	following	is	the	introduction	[to	the	means	of	experiencing]	this	[single]
nature	[of	mind]
Through	the	application	of	three	considerations:
[First,	recognise	that]	past	thoughts	are	traceless,	clear,	and	empty,

[Second,	recognise	that]	future	thoughts	are	unproduced	and	fresh,
And	 [third,	 recognise	 that]	 the	 present	 moment	 abides	 naturally	 and
unconstructed.
When	 this	 ordinary,	 momentary	 consciousness	 is	 examined	 nakedly	 [and
directly]	by	oneself,
Upon	examination,	it	is	a	radiant	awareness,
Which	is	free	from	the	presence	of	an	observer,
Manifestly	stark	and	clear,
Completely	empty	and	uncreated	in	all	respects,
Lucid,	without	duality	of	radiance	and	emptiness,
Not	permanent,	for	it	is	lacking	inherent	existence	in	all	respects,
Not	a	mere	nothingness,	for	it	is	radiant	and	clear,
Not	a	single	entity,	for	it	is	clearly	perceptible	as	a	multiplicity,
Yet	not	existing	inherently	as	a	multiplicity,	for	it	is	indivisible	and	of	a	single
savour.
12
This	intrinsic	awareness,	which	is	not	extraneously	derived,
Is	itself	the	genuine	introduction	to	the	abiding	nature	of	[all]	things.
For	in	this	[intrinsic	awareness],	the	three	buddha-bodies	are	inseparable,	and
fully	present	as	one:
Its	emptiness	and	utter	lack	of	inherent	existence	is	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality;
The	natural	resonance	and	radiance	of	this	emptiness	is	the	Buddha-body	of
Perfect	Resource;
And	its	unimpeded	arising	in	any	form	whatsoever	is	the	Buddha-body	of
Emanation.
These	three,	fully	present	as	one,	are	the	very	essence	[of	awareness]	itself.
[CONSEQUENCES	OF	THE	INTRODUCTION	TO
AWARENESS]
When	the	introduction	is	powerfully	applied	in	accordance	with	the	[above]
method	for	entering	into	this	[reality]:
One’s	own	immediate	consciousness	is	this	very	[reality]!
[Abiding]	in	this	[reality],	which	is	uncontrived	and	naturally	radiant,
How	can	one	say	that	one	does	not	understand	the	nature	of	mind?

[Abiding]	in	this	[reality],	wherein	there	is	nothing	on	which	to	meditate,
How	 can	 one	 say	 that,	 by	 having	 entered	 into	 meditation,	 one	 was	 not
successful?
[Abiding]	in	this	[reality],	which	is	one’s	actual	awareness	itself,
How	can	one	say	that	one	could	not	find	one’s	own	mind?
[Abiding]	 in	 this	 [reality],	 the	 uninterrupted	 [union]	 of	 radiance	 and
awareness,
How	can	one	say	that	the	[true]	face	of	mind	has	not	been	seen?
[Abiding]	in	this	[reality],	which	is	itself	the	cogniser,
How	can	one	say	that,	though	sought,	this	[cogniser]	could	not	be	found?
[Abiding]	in	this	[reality],	where	there	is	nothing	at	all	to	be	done,
How	can	one	say	that,	whatever	one	did,	one	did	not	succeed?
Given	that	it	is	sufficient	to	leave	[this	awareness]	as	it	is,	uncontrived,
How	can	one	say	that	one	could	not	continue	to	abide	[in	that	state]?
Given	 that	 it	 is	 sufficient	 to	 leave	 it	 as	 it	 is,	 without	 doing	 anything
whatsoever,
How	can	one	say	that	one	could	not	do	just	that?
Given	 that,	 [within	 this	 reality],	 radiance,	 awareness,	 and	 emptiness	 are
inseparable	and	spontaneously	present,
How	can	one	say	that,	by	having	practised,	one	attained	nothing?
Given	that	[this	reality]	is	naturally	originating	and	spontaneously	present,
without	causes	or	conditions,
How	 can	 one	 say	 that,	 by	 having	 made	 the	 effort	 [to	 find	 it],	 one	 was
incapable	[of	success]?
Given	 that	 the	 arising	 and	 liberation	 of	 conceptual	 thoughts	 occur
simultaneously,
How	 can	 one	 say	 that,	 by	 having	 applied	 this	 antidote	 [to	 conceptual
thoughts],	one	was	not	effective?
[Abiding]	in	this	immediate	consciousness	itself,
How	can	one	say	that	one	does	not	know	this	[reality]?
13
[OBSERVATIONS	RELATED	TO	EXAMINING	THE	NATURE
OF	MIND]
Be	certain	that	the	nature	of	mind	is	empty	and	without	foundation.

One’s	own	mind	is	insubstantial,	like	an	empty	sky.
Look	at	your	own	mind	to	see	whether	it	is	like	that	or	not.
Divorced	 from	 views	 which	 constructedly	 determine	 [the	 nature	 of]
emptiness,
Be	certain	that	pristine	cognition,	naturally	originating,	is	primordially	radiant
—
Just	like	the	nucleus	of	the	sun,	which	is	itself	naturally	originating.
Look	at	your	own	mind	to	see	whether	it	is	like	that	or	not!
	
Be	certain	that	this	awareness,	which	is	pristine	cognition,	is	uninterrupted,
Like	the	coursing	central	torrent	of	a	river	which	flows	unceasingly.
Look	at	your	own	mind	to	see	whether	it	is	like	that	or	not!
	
Be	certain	that	conceptual	thoughts	and	fleeting	memories	are	not	strictly
identifiable,
But	insubstantial	in	their	motion,	like	the	breezes	of	the	atmosphere.
Look	at	your	own	mind	to	see	whether	it	is	like	that	or	not!
	
Be	certain	that	all	that	appears	is	naturally	manifest	[in	the	mind],
Like	the	images	in	a	mirror	which	[also]	appear	naturally.
Look	at	your	own	mind	to	see	whether	it	is	like	that	or	not!
Be	certain	that	all	characteristics	are	liberated	right	where	they	are,
Like	 the	 clouds	 of	 the	 atmosphere,	 naturally	 originating	 and	 naturally
dissolving.
Look	at	your	own	mind	to	see	whether	it	is	like	that	or	not!
	
There	are	no	phenomena	extraneous	to	those	that	originate	from	the	mind.
[So],	how	could	there	be	anything	on	which	to	meditate	apart	from	the	mind?
There	are	no	phenomena	extraneous	to	those	that	originate	from	the	mind.
[So],	there	are	no	modes	of	conduct	to	be	undertaken	extraneous	[to	those	that
originate	from	the	mind].
There	are	no	phenomena	extraneous	to	those	that	originate	from	the	mind.
[So],	there	are	no	commitments	to	be	kept	extraneous	[to	those	that	originate
from	the	mind].
There	are	no	phenomena	extraneous	to	those	that	originate	from	the	mind.
[So],	there	are	no	results	to	be	attained	extraneous	[to	those	that	originate	from
the	mind].

There	are	no	phenomena	extraneous	to	those	that	originate	from	the	mind.
[So],	one	should	observe	one’s	own	mind,	looking	into	its	nature	again	and
again.
	
If,	upon	looking	outwards	towards	the	external	expanse	of	the	sky,
There	are	no	projections	emanated	by	the	mind,
And	if,	on	looking	inwards	at	one’s	own	mind,
There	is	no	projectionist	who	projects	[thoughts]	by	thinking	them,
Then,	one’s	own	mind,	completely	free	from	conceptual	projections,	will
become	luminously	clear.
[This]	intrinsic	awareness,	[union	of]	inner	radiance	and	emptiness,	is	the
Buddha-body	of	Reality,
[Appearing]	like	[the	illumining	effect	of]	a	sunrise	on	a	clear	and	cloudless
sky,
It	is	clearly	knowable,	despite	its	lack	of	specific	shape	or	form.
There	is	a	great	distinction	between	those	who	understand	and	those	who
misunderstand	this	point.
	
This	naturally	originating	inner	radiance,	uncreated	from	the	very	beginning,
Is	the	parentless	child	of	awareness	—	how	amazing!
It	is	the	naturally	originating	pristine	cognition,	uncreated	by	anyone	—	how
amazing!
[This	radiant	awareness]	has	never	been	born	and	will	never	die	—	how
amazing!
Though	 manifestly	 radiant,	 it	 lacks	 an	 [extraneous]	 perceiver	 —	 how
amazing!
Though	it	has	roamed	throughout	cyclic	existence,	it	does	not	degenerate	—
how	amazing!
Though	it	has	seen	buddhahood	itself,	it	does	not	improve	—	how	amazing!
Though	it	is	present	in	everyone,	it	remains	unrecognised	—	how	amazing!
Still,	one	hopes	for	some	attainment	other	than	this	—	how	amazing!
Though	it	is	present	within	oneself,	one	continues	to	seek	it	elsewhere	—	how
amazing!
[INTRINSIC	AWARENESS	AS	VIEW,	MEDITATION,
CONDUCT,	AND	RESULT]

EMA!	This	immediate	awareness,	insubstantial	and	radiant,
Is	itself	the	highest	of	all	views.
This	non-referential,	all-encompassing	[awareness]	which	is	free	in	every
respect
Is	itself	the	highest	of	all	meditations.
This	uncontrived	[activity	based	on	awareness],	simply	expressed	in	worldly
terms,
Is	itself	the	highest	of	all	types	of	conduct.
This	 unsought	 [attainment	 of	 awareness],	 spontaneously	 present	 from	 the
beginning,
Is	itself	the	highest	of	all	results.
[Now],	the	four	great	media,	which	are	errorless,	are	presented:
14
[First],	the	great	medium	of	errorless	view
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	radiant	and	without	error,	it	is	called	a	‘medium’.
[Second],	the	great	medium	of	errorless	meditation
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	radiant	and	without	error,	it	is	called	a	‘medium’.
[Third],	the	great	medium	of	errorless	conduct
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	radiant	and	without	error,	it	is	called	a	‘medium’.
[Fourth],	the	great	medium	of	errorless	result
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	radiant	and	without	error,	it	is	called	a	‘medium’.
	
[Now]	the	four	great	nails,	which	are	unchanging,	are	presented:
15
[First],	the	great	nail	of	the	unchanging	view
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	firm	throughout	the	three	times,	it	is	called	a	‘nail’.	[Second],	the
great	nail	of	unchanging	meditation
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	firm	throughout	the	three	times,	it	is	called	a	‘nail’.
[Third],	the	great	nail	of	unchanging	conduct
Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	firm	throughout	the	three	times,	it	is	called	a	‘nail’.
[Fourth],	the	great	nail	of	the	unchanging	result

Is	this	radiant	immediate	awareness	—
Since	it	is	firm	throughout	the	three	times,	it	is	called	a	‘nail’.
	
Now	follows	the	esoteric	instruction	which	reveals	the	three	times	to	be	one:
Abandon	your	notions	of	the	past,	without	attributing	a	temporal	sequence!
Cut	off	your	mental	associations	regarding	the	future,	without	anticipation!
Rest	in	a	spacious	modality,	without	clinging	to	[the	thoughts	of]	the	present.
Do	not	meditate	at	all,	since	there	is	nothing	upon	which	to	meditate.
Instead,	revelation	will	come	through	undistracted	mindfulness	—
Since	there	is	nothing	by	which	you	can	be	distracted.
Nakedly	observe	[all	that	arises]	in	this	modality,	which	is	without	meditation
and	without	distraction!
When	this	[experience]	arises,
Intrinsically	aware,	naturally	cognisant,	naturally	radiant	and	clear,
It	is	called	‘the	mind	of	enlightenment’.
Since	[within	this	mind	of	enlightenment]	there	is	nothing	upon	which	to
meditate,
This	[modality]	transcends	all	objects	of	knowledge.
Since	[within	this	mind	of	enlightenment]	there	are	no	distractions,
It	is	the	radiance	of	the	essence	itself.
This	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	[union	of]	radiance	and	emptiness,
In	which	[the	duality	of]	appearance	and	emptiness	is	naturally	liberated,
Becomes	 manifest	 [in	 this	 way],	 unattained	 by	 the	 [structured]	 path	 to
buddhahood,
And	thus	Vajrasattva	is	[actually]	perceived	at	this	moment.
	
Now	follows	the	instruction	which	brings	one	to	the	point	where	the	six
extreme	[perspectives]	are	exhausted:
16
Though	there	is	a	vast	plethora	of	discordant	views,
Within	this	intrinsic	awareness	or	[single	nature	of]	mind,
Which	is	the	naturally	originating	pristine	cognition,
There	is	no	duality	between	the	object	viewed	and	the	observer.
Without	focusing	on	the	view,	search	for	the	observer!
Though	one	searches	for	this	observer,	none	will	be	found.
So,	at	that	instant,	one	will	be	brought	to	the	exhaustion	point	of	the	view.
At	that	very	moment,	one	will	encounter	the	innermost	boundary	of	the	view.

Since	there	is	no	object	at	all	to	be	observed,
And	since	one	has	not	fallen	into	a	primordial	vacuous	emptiness,
17
The	lucid	awareness,	which	is	now	present,
Is	itself	the	view	of	the	Great	Perfection.
[Here],	there	is	no	duality	between	realisation	and	lack	of	realisation.
Though	there	is	a	vast	plethora	of	discordant	meditations,
Within	this	intrinsic	awareness,
Which	penetrates	ordinary	consciousness	to	the	core,
There	is	no	duality	between	the	object	of	meditation	and	the	meditator.
Without	meditating	on	the	object	of	meditation,	search	for	the	meditator!
Though	one	searches	for	this	meditator,	none	will	be	found.
So,	at	that	instant,	one	will	be	brought	to	the	exhaustion	point	of	meditation.
At	 that	 very	 moment,	 one	 will	 encounter	 the	 innermost	 boundary	 of
meditation.
Since	there	is	no	object	at	all	on	which	to	meditate,
And	since	one	has	not	fallen	under	the	sway	of	delusion,	drowsiness,	or
agitation,
18
The	lucid	uncontrived	awareness,	which	is	now	present,
Is	itself	the	uncontrived	meditative	equipoise	or	concentration.
[Here],	there	is	no	duality	between	abiding	and	non-abiding.
	
Though	there	is	a	vast	plethora	of	discordant	modes	of	conduct,
Within	this	intrinsic	awareness,
Which	is	the	unique	seminal	point	of	pristine	cognition,
There	is	no	duality	between	the	action	and	the	actor.
Without	focusing	on	the	action,	search	for	the	actor!
Though	one	searches	for	this	actor,	none	will	be	found.
So,	at	that	instant,	one	will	be	brought	to	the	exhaustion	point	of	conduct.
At	that	very	moment,	one	will	encounter	the	innermost	boundary	of	conduct.
Since,	from	the	beginning,	there	has	been	no	conduct	to	undertake,
And	since	one	has	not	fallen	under	the	sway	of	bewildering	propensities,
The	lucid	uncontrived	awareness,	which	is	now	present,
Is	itself	pure	conduct,	without	having	to	be	contrived,	modified,	accepted	or
rejected.
[Here],	there	is	no	duality	between	purity	and	impurity.
Though	there	is	a	vast	plethora	of	discordant	results,

Within	this	intrinsic	awareness,
Which	is	the	true	nature	of	mind,	the	spontaneous	presence	of	the	three
buddha-bodies,
There	is	no	duality	between	the	object	of	attainment	and	the	attainer.
Without	focusing	on	the	attainment	of	the	result,	search	for	the	attainer!
Though	one	searches	for	this	attainer,	none	will	be	found.
So,	at	that	instant,	one	will	be	brought	to	the	exhaustion	point	of	the	result.
At	that	very	moment,	one	will	encounter	the	innermost	boundary	of	the	result.
Since,	whatever	the	[projected]	result,	there	is	nothing	to	be	attained,
And	since	one	has	not	fallen	under	the	sway	of	rejection	and	acceptance,	or
hope	and	doubt,
The	naturally	radiant	awareness,	which	is	now	spontaneously	present,
Is	the	fully	manifest	realisation	of	the	three	buddha-bodies,	within	oneself.
[Here],	there	is	the	result,	atemporal	buddhahood	itself.
[SYNONYMS	FOR	AWARENESS]
This	awareness,	free	from	the	eight	extremes,	such	as	eternalism	and	nihilism
[and	so	forth],
Is	called	the	‘Middle	Way’,	which	does	not	fall	into	any	extremes.
It	is	called	‘awareness’	because	mindfulness	is	uninterrupted.
It	is	given	the	name	‘Nucleus	of	the	Tathāgata’
Because	emptiness	is	[naturally]	endowed	with	this	nucleus	of	awareness.
If	one	understands	this	truth,	one	reaches	perfection	in	all	respects,
For	 which	 reason,	 this	 [awareness]	 is	 also	 called	 the	 ‘Perfection	 of
Discriminative	Awareness’.
Furthermore,	it	is	called	the	‘Great	Seal’	because	it	transcends	the	intellect	and
is	atemporally	free	from	extremes,
And,	further,	it	is	called	the	‘Ground-of-all’,
Because	[this	awareness]	is	the	ground	of	all	joys	and	sorrows	associated	with
cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa	—
The	 distinction	 between	 these	 being	 contingent	 on	 whether	 or	 not	 this
[awareness]	is	realised.
[Further],	this	radiant	and	lucid	awareness	is	itself	referred	to	as	‘ordinary
consciousness’,
On	account	of	those	periods	when	it	abides	in	its	natural	state	in	an	ordinary

non-exceptional	way.
Thus,	however	many	well-conceived	and	pleasant-sounding	names	are	applied
to	this	[awareness],
In	reality,	those	who	maintain	that	these	names	do	not	refer	to	this	present
conscious	awareness,
But	to	something	else,	above	and	beyond	it,
Resemble	someone	who	has	already	found	an	elephant,	but	is	out	looking	for
its	tracks	[elsewhere].
	
Though	one	were	to	scan	the	[entire]	external	universe,
[Searching	for	the	nature	of	mind],	one	would	not	find	it.
Buddhahood	cannot	be	attained	other	than	through	the	mind.
Not	recognising	this,	one	does	indeed	search	for	the	mind	externally,
Yet,	how	can	one	find	[one’s	own	mind]	when	one	looks	for	it	elsewhere?
This	is	like	a	fool,	for	example,	who,	when	finding	himself	amidst	a	crowd	of
people,
Becomes	mesmerised	by	the	spectacle	[of	the	crowd]	and	forgets	himself,
Then,	no	longer	recognising	who	he	is,	starts	searching	elsewhere	for	himself,
Continuously	mistaking	others	for	himself.
	
[Similarly],	since	one	does	not	discern	the	abiding	nature,
Which	is	the	fundamental	reality	of	[all]	things,
One	is	cast	into	cyclic	existence,	not	knowing	that	appearances	are	to	be
identified	with	the	mind,
And,	not	discerning	one’s	own	mind	to	be	buddha,	nirvāṇa	becomes	obscured.
The	[apparent]	dichotomy	between	cyclic	existence	and	
nirvāṇa	is	due	to	[the
dichotomy	between]	ignorance	and	awareness,
But	there	is	[in	reality]	no	temporal	divide	between	these	two,	[even]	by	a
single	moment.
	
Seeing	the	mind	as	extraneous	to	oneself	is	indeed	bewildering,
Yet	bewilderment	and	non-bewilderment	are	of	a	single	essence.
Since	there	exists	no	[intrinsic]	dichotomy	in	the	mental	continuum	of	sentient
beings,
The	uncontrived	nature	of	mind	is	liberated	just	by	being	left	in	its	natural
state.
Yet	if	you	remain	unaware	that	bewilderment	[originates]	in	the	mind,

You	will	never	understand	the	meaning	of	actual	reality.
So	you	should	observe	that	which	naturally	arises	and	naturally	originates
within	your	own	[mind].
[First],	observe	[the	source]	from	which	these	appearances	initially	originated,
[Second,	observe	the	place]	in	which	they	abide	in	the	interim,
And	[third,	observe	the	place]	to	which	they	will	finally	go.
Then,	one	will	find	that,	just	as,	for	example,	a	pond-dwelling	crow	does	not
stray	from	its	pond,
Even	though	it	flies	away	from	the	pond,
Similarly,	although	appearances	arise	from	the	mind,
They	arise	from	the	mind	and	subside	into	the	mind	of	their	own	accord.
	
This	nature	of	mind,	which	is	all-knowing,	aware	of	everything,	empty	and
radiant,
Is	 established	 to	 be	 the	 manifestly	 radiant	 and	 self-originating	 pristine
cognition,
[Present]	from	the	beginning,	just	like	the	sky,
As	an	indivisible	[union]	of	emptiness	and	radiance.
This	itself	is	actual	reality.
The	indication	that	this	is	[the	actual	reality]	is	that	all	phenomenal	existence
is	perceived	in	[the	single	nature	of]	one’s	own	mind;
And	this	nature	of	mind	is	aware	and	radiant.
Therefore,	recognise	[this	nature]	to	be	like	the	sky!
However,	this	example	of	the	sky,	though	used	to	illustrate	actual	reality,
Is	merely	a	symbol,	a	partial	and	provisional	illustration.
For	the	nature	of	mind	is	aware,	empty	and	radiant	in	all	respects,
While	the	sky	is	without	awareness,	empty,	inanimate	and	void.
Therefore,	the	true	understanding	of	the	nature	of	mind	is	not	illustrated	by
[the	metaphor	of]	the	sky.
[To	achieve	this	understanding],	let	the	mind	remain	in	its	own	state,	without
distraction!
[THE	NATURE	OF	APPEARANCES]
Now,	with	regard	to	the	diversity	of	relative	appearances:

They	are	all	perishable;	not	one	of	them	is	genuinely	existent.
All	phenomenal	existence,	all	the	things	of	cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa,
Are	the	discernible	manifestations	of	the	unique	essential	nature	of	one’s	own
mind.
[This	is	known	because]	whenever	one’s	own	mental	continuum	undergoes
change,
There	will	arise	the	discernible	manifestation	of	an	external	change.
Therefore,	all	things	are	the	discernible	manifestations	of	mind.
For	example,	the	six	classes	of	living	beings	discern	phenomenal	appearances
in	their	differing	ways:
Eternalistic	 extremists	 [and	 others]	 who	 are	 remote	 from	 [the	 Buddhist
perspective],
Perceive	[appearances]	in	terms	of	a	dichotomy	of	eternalism	and	nihilism;
And	[followers	of]	the	nine	sequences	of	the	vehicle	perceive	[appearances]	in
terms	of	their	respective	views,	[and	so	forth].
For	as	long	as	this	diversity	[of	appearances]	is	being	perceived	and	diversely
elucidated,
Differences	[as	to	the	nature	of	appearances]	are	apprehended,
And	consequently,	bewilderment	comes	about	through	attachment	to	those
respective	[views].
Yet,	even	though	all	those	appearances,	of	which	one	is	aware	in	one’s	own
mind,
Do	arise	as	discernible	manifestations,
Buddhahood	is	present	[simply]	when	they	are	not	subjectively	apprehended
or	grasped.
Bewilderment	does	not	come	about	on	account	of	these	appearances	—
But	it	does	come	about	through	their	subjective	apprehension.
[Thus],	if	the	subjectively	apprehending	thoughts	are	known	to	be	[of	the
single	nature	of]	mind,	they	will	be	liberated	of	their	own	accord.
	
All	things	that	appear	are	manifestations	of	mind.
The	surrounding	environment	which	appears	to	be	inanimate,	that	too	is	mind.
The	sentient	life-forms	which	appear	as	the	six	classes	of	living	beings,	they
too	are	mind.
The	joys	of	both	the	gods	and	humans	of	the	higher	existences	which	appear,
they	too	are	mind.
The	sorrows	of	the	three	lower	existences	which	appear,	they	too	are	mind.

The	five	poisons,	representing	the	dissonant	mental	states	of	ignorance,	which
appear,	they	too	are	mind.
The	awareness,	that	is	self-originating	pristine	cognition	which	appears,	it	too
is	mind.
The	beneficial	thoughts	conducive	to	attainment	of	nirvāṇa	which	appear,	they
too	are	mind.
The	obstacles	of	malevolent	forces	and	spirits	which	appear,	they	too	are
mind.
The	deities	and	[spiritual]	accomplishments	which	manifest	exquisitely,	they
too	are	mind.
The	diverse	kinds	of	pure	[vision]	which	appear,	they	too	are	mind.
The	non-conceptual	one-pointed	abiding	[in	meditation]	which	appears,	it	too
is	mind.
The	colours	characteristic	of	objects	which	appear,	they	too	are	mind.
The	state	without	characteristics	and	without	conceptual	elaboration	which
appears,	it	too	is	mind.
The	non-duality	of	the	single	and	the	multiple	which	appears,	it	too	is	mind.
The	unproveability	of	existence	and	non-existence	which	appears,	it	too	is
mind.
19
	
There	are	no	appearances	at	all	apart	from	[those	that	originate	in]	the	mind.
The	unimpeded	nature	of	mind	assumes	all	manner	of	appearances.
Yet,	though	these	[appearances]	arise,	they	are	without	duality,
And	they	[naturally]	subside	into	the	modality	of	mind,
Like	waves	in	the	waters	of	an	ocean.
Whatever	 names	 are	 given	 to	 these	 unceasingly	 [arising]	 objects	 of
designation,
In	actuality,	there	is	but	one	[single	nature	of]	mind,
And	that	single	[nature	of	mind]	is	without	foundation	and	without	root.
[Therefore],	it	is	not	perceptible	at	all,	in	any	direction	whatsoever.
It	is	not	perceptible	as	substance,	for	it	lacks	inherent	existence	in	all	respects.
It	is	not	perceptible	as	emptiness,	for	it	is	the	resonance	of	awareness	and
radiance.
It	is	not	perceptible	as	diversity,	for	it	is	the	indivisibility	of	radiance	and
emptiness.
This	present	intrinsic	awareness	is	manifestly	radiant	and	clear,
And	even	though	there	exists	no	known	means	by	which	it	can	be	fabricated,

And	even	though	[this	awareness]	is	without	inherent	existence,
It	can	be	directly	experienced.
[Thus],	if	it	is	experientially	cultivated,	all	[beings]	will	be	liberated.
[CONCLUSION]
All	those	of	all	[differing]	potential,	regardless	of	their	acumen	or	dullness,
May	realise	[this	intrinsic	awareness].
However,	for	example,	even	though	sesame	is	the	source	of	oil,	and	milk	of
butter,
But	there	will	be	no	extract	if	these	are	unpressed	or	unchurned,
Similarly,	even	though	all	beings	actually	possess	the	seed	of	buddhahood,
Sentient	beings	will	not	attain	buddhahood	without	experiential	cultivation.
Nonetheless,	even	a	cowherd	will	attain	liberation	if	he	or	she	engages	in
experiential	cultivation.
For,	even	though	one	may	not	know	how	to	elucidate	[this	state]	intellectually,
One	will	[through	experiential	cultivation]	become	manifestly	established	in
it.
One	whose	mouth	has	actually	tasted	molasses,
Does	not	need	others	to	explain	its	taste.
But,	even	learned	scholars	who	have	not	realised	[this	single	nature	of	mind]
will	remain	the	victims	of	bewilderment.
For,	however	learned	and	knowledgeable	in	explaining	the	nine	vehicles	they
may	be,
They	will	be	like	those	who	spread	fabulous	tales	of	remote	[places]	they	have
never	seen,
And	as	far	as	the	attainment	of	buddhahood	is	concerned,
They	will	not	approach	it,	even	for	an	instant.
	
If	this	nature	[of	intrinsic	awareness]	is	understood,
Virtuous	and	negative	acts	will	be	liberated,	right	where	they	are.
But	if	this	[single	nature]	is	not	understood,
One	will	amass	nothing	but	[future	lives	within]	cyclic	existence,	with	its
higher	and	lower	realms,
Regardless	of	whether	one	has	engaged	in	virtuous	or	non-virtuous	actions.

Yet,	if	one’s	own	mind	is	simply	understood	to	be	pristine	cognition,	[utterly]
empty	[of	inherent	existence],
The	consequences	of	virtuous	and	negative	actions	will	never	come	to	fruition
—
For	just	as	a	spring	cannot	materialise	in	empty	space,
Within	[the	realisation	of]	emptiness,	virtuous	and	negative	actions	do	not
objectively	exist.
20
	
So	it	is	that,	for	the	purpose	of	nakedly	perceiving	the	manifestly	present
intrinsic	awareness,
This	
Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
	is	most	profound.
Thus,	[by	following	this	instruction],	one	should	familiarise	oneself	with	this
intrinsic	awareness.
	
Profoundly	Sealed!
	
E-MA!
This	
Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
Has	been	composed	for	the	sake	of	future	generations,	the	sentient	beings	of	a
degenerate	age.
[It	integrates]	in	a	purposeful	concise	abridgement,
All	my	preferred	tantras,	transmissions	and	esoteric	instructions.
Though	I	have	disseminated	it	at	this	present	time,
It	will	be	concealed	as	a	precious	treasure.
May	it	be	encountered	by	those	of	the	future,
Who	have	a	[positive]	inheritance	of	past	actions.
21
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
This	treatise	concerning	the	direct	introduction	to	awareness,	entitled	
Natural
Liberation	 through	 Naked	 Perception
,	 was	 composed	 by	 Padmākara,	 the
preceptor	of	Oḍḍiyāna.	May	[its	influence]	not	be	ended	until	cyclic	existence
has	been	emptied.

5
The	Spiritual	Practice	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual
Tendencies
CONTEXT
This	is	the	concise	‘generation	stage’	practice	associated	with	this	cycle
of	teachings.	Normally,	after	completing	the	preparatory	philosophical
studies	and	meditational	practices	over	many	years,	the	full	generation
stage	practice	entitled	
The	Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings
	
would	be	done
four	times	a	day	while	in	an	extended	solitary	retreat.	Following	this
retreat,	the	full	generation	stage	practice	should	be	done	at	least	monthly.
As	 a	 method	 for	 enhancing	 and	 sustaining	 an	 unbroken	 purity	 of
perception,	this	concise	practice,	
The	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual
Tendencies
,	should	be	done	three	times	a	day,	in	the	morning,	at	midday
and	 in	 the	 evening,	 throughout	 the	 practitioner’s	 life.	 If	 this	 is	 not
practical,	then	the	concise	practice	should	be	done	twice	a	day,	in	the
morning	and	evening,	or	at	least	once	a	day	in	the	morning,	following	the
Preliminary	Practice
	(Chapter	1).
The	aim	is	to	provide	a	means	by	which	the	practitioner	can	cultivate
an	unwavering	recognition	of	the	nature	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities	within	his	or	her	own	mind	and	body.	Thereby	recognition	of	the
natural	 purity	 of	 the	 practitioner’s	 impure	 habitual	 tendencies	 is
continuously	 developed.	 The	 measure	 of	 successful	 training	 is:	 the
location	 and	 nature	 of	 the	 deities	 will	 be	 remembered	 even	 in	 the
practitioner’s	dreams,	and,	the	arising	of	a	sustained	recognition	that	all
phenomena,	sounds	and	thoughts	are,	in	their	essence,	the	body,	speech
and	mind	of	the	deities.
Herein	 is	 contained	
The	 Spiritual	 Practice	 entitled	 Natural	 Liberation	 of
Habitual	Tendencies
,
1
	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through

[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention.
2
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra	and	Mahottara,
3
To	the	assembly	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	deities,
And	to	the	assembly	of	the	Hundred	Sacred	Enlightened	Families!
Having	been	liberated	in	the	intermediate	states,
May	all	beings	abide	in	the	reality	of	the	three	buddha-bodies.
	
O	You	who	are	fortunate	and	auspiciously	blessed,
Apply	[yourself	to]	the	meditations	and	recitations	of	this	most	lucid	Spiritual
Practice,
Which	is	a	coalescence	of	the	[full	means	of	accomplishment]	of	the	Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities!
Never	forget	[to	practise	this]	throughout	the	three	times.
THE	TEN-BRANCHED	PRAYER	FOR	THE	ACCUMULATION
[OF	MERIT]
[First],	visualise	in	the	space	before	you	the	Three	Precious	Jewels	and	the
deities	of	the	hundred	enlightened	families,	and	then	recite	as	follows:
	
The	Branch	of	Taking	Refuge
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
I	respectfully	take	refuge,	inseparably,	from	now	until	enlightenment,
In	the	infinitude	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	the	Conquerors	Gone	to
Bliss,
The	Three	Precious	Jewels,	the	meditational	deities,
The	ocean	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	and	assembly	of	oath-bound	protectors,
Within	the	infinite	[buddha]	fields,	reaching	to	the	limits	of	space.
	
The	Branch	of	Invitation
I	request	the	infinite	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
Of	the	ten	directions	and	four	times,
Compassionate	emanations	embodying	discriminative	awareness	and	skilful

means,
Pervading	the	vast	infinite	space	of	reality’s	expanse,
To	come	to	this	place	for	the	sake	of	[all]	living	beings.
	
The	Branch	of	Requesting	[the	Deities]	to	be	Seated
I	request	that	[the	meditational	deities]	be	seated,
Here	on	sun,	moon,	and	lotus	cushions,
[Symbolising]	 skilful	 means,	 discriminative	 awareness,	 and	 their	 stainless
[union],
Upon	their	bejewelled	thrones	[fashioned]	in	the	form	of	lions	and	so	forth,
In	[an	attitude	of]	unblemished	supreme	delight,
Within	this	maṇḍala	of	pristine	cognition,
Which	is	the	[natural]	purity	of	phenomenal	existence!
	
The	Branch	of	Paying	Homage
I	bow	down	to	the	assembly	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Conquerors,
To	the	father	and	mother	deities,	and	[all]	their	offspring,
[Whose	essence	is]	the	pristine	cognition	of	Samantabhadra,
Displayed	as	uncorrupted	bliss	in	the	secret	womb	of	Samantabhadr
ῑ
.
	
The	Branch	of	Making	Offerings
I	request	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Conquerors,	the	oceans	of	Those	Gone	to
Bliss,
To	partake	of	these	inestimable	outer,	inner,	and	secret	offerings,
Both	those	actually	arrayed	and	those	mentally	emanated,
Which	are	offered	for	the	benefit	of	all	living	beings.
	
The	Branch	of	the	Confession	of	Negativity
I	acknowledge	and	remorsefully	confess	all	my	negative	obscurations
And	all	my	habitual	tendencies	of	body,	speech	and	mind,
Beginninglessly	influenced	by	the	three	poisons
Which	are	the	accumulating	causes	for	[rebirth]
Among	the	lower	states	[of	suffering]	in	cyclic	existence.
	
The	Branch	of	Sympathetic	Rejoicing
I	rejoice	with	great	delight	in	the	[buddha]	fields	of	supreme	bliss,

Where	all	phenomenal	existence	is	[recognised	as]	the	pervasion	of	reality’s
expanse.
I	rejoice	in	[all]	compassionate	acts,	in	their	merits,	and	in	their	altruistic
intention,
And	in	all	[deeds	that	are]	the	source	of	merit	and	pristine	cognition.
	
The	Branch	of	Turning	the	Wheel	of	the	[Sacred]	Teachings
I	exhort	the	teachers	throughout	the	fields	of	the	ten	directions,
Who	are	as	numerous	as	atoms,
To	stir	from	their	meditative	commitments	for	the	sake	of	all	sentient	beings,
And	to	turn	the	Wheel	of	the	Sacred	Teachings,
Thus	[entirely]	pervading	the	reaches	of	space.
	
The	Branch	of	Requesting	[the	Buddhas]	Not	to	Enter	Nirvāṇa
I	beseech	you	all,	O	teachers,	infinite	buddhas	without	exception,
To	remain	[present]	and	not	to	pass	into	nirvāṇa,
And	to	continue	to	enact	deeds	of	extensive	benefit	for	the	sake	of	beings,
Until	the	world-systems	of	cyclic	existence	have	been	emptied!
	
The	Branch	of	the	Dedication	[of	Merit]	to	the	Unsurpassed	Greater	Vehicle
[By	the	power	of]	whatever	past,	present	and	future	virtues	I	accumulate,
May	all	sentient	beings,	throughout	the	furthest	reaches	of	space,
Mature	into	worthy	recipients	of	the	unsurpassed	Greater	Vehicle,
And	then	swiftly	attain	the	status	of	the	infinite	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities!
PURIFICATION
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	BODHICITTA	MAHĀSUKHAJÑĀNA	DHĀTU	ĀḤ	OṂ	RULU
RULU	HŪṂ	BHYOḤ	HŪṂ	
4
	
From	the	field	of	reality’s	expanse,	uncreated	and	pure,
Within	a	celestial	palace,	which	is	a	seminal	point	[of	light],	pure,	unceasing,
and	radiant,
Through	the	natural	expressive	power	of	one’s	own	mind,	uncontrived	and
empty,

Intrinsic	awareness,	radiant	and	empty,	arises	in	the	form	of	Vajrasattva,
[Seated]	 upon	 a	 bejewelled	 throne	 adorned	 with	 lotus,	 sun	 and	 moon
[cushions].
[Vajrasattva	 is]	 white,	 radiant,	 with	 one	 face,	 two	 arms,	 and	 a	 smiling
countenance;
The	right	hand	holds	a	vajra	at	the	heart,
[Symbolising	the	union]	of	awareness	and	emptiness,
The	left	hand	supports	a	bell	[resting]	on	the	hip,
[Symbolising	the	union]	of	appearances	and	emptiness;
And	the	head	[is	adorned	with	a	garland	of]	perfect	buddhas,
[Representing]	the	five	enlightened	families	of	Those	Gone	to	Bliss.
Thus,	[Vajrasattva]	manifests	in	the	form	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource,
[Exquisitely]	adorned	with	silks	and	jewels,
Seated	in	the	posture	of	royal	ease,
With	the	right	leg	extended,	and	the	left	drawn	in.
5
	
[Radiating]	at	the	heart	is	the	seed-syllable	HŪṂ,
Surrounded	by	the	Hundred-syllable	Mantra:
	
OṂ	 VAJRASATTVA	 SAMAYAMANUPĀLAYA	 VAJRASATTVA
TVENOPATIṢṬHA	DṚḌHO	ME	BHAVA	SUPOṢYO	ME	BHAVA	SUTOṢYO
ME	BHAVA	ANURAKTO	ME	BHAVA	SARVASIDDHIṂ	ME	PRAYACCHA
SARVAKARMASU	CA	ME	CITTAṂ	ŚREYAḤ	KURU	HŪṂ	HAHAHAHA
HO	 BHAGAVĀN	 SARVA	 TATHĀGATA	 VAJRA	 MĀ	 ME	 MUÑCA
VAJRABHAVA	MAHĀSAMAYASATTVA	ĀḤ	
6
	
Having	performed	the	twofold	act	of	benefiting	[self	and	others]	through	the
emanation	and	reabsorption	[of	light	from	these	syllables],	the	obscurations	of
conceptual	thought	are	purified.	Do	not	be	distracted!	Recite	this	quintessential
[mantra]	of	the	hundred	sacred	enlightened	families	as	much	as	possible,	so	that
the	two	obscurations	may	be	cleansed.
MAIN	PRACTICE

Having	thus	purified	the	[two]	obscurations,	one	should	visualise	the	assembled
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	hundred	sacred	enlightened	families	as	a
maṇḍala	[of	deities]	within	one’s	body,	and	pray.	It	is	in	this	context	that	the
aspirational	 prayers	 of	 the	 intermediate	 states	 are	 recited.	 [The	 combined
practice]	is	as	follows:
Then,	[maintaining	the	recognition	of]	oneself	as	Vajrasattva,
In	the	celestial	palace	of	one’s	own	precious	heart,
One	clearly	discerns	a	seminal	point	[formed	of]	the	five	lights,
Whose	nature	is	the	five	pure	essences	[of	the	five	elements],
[And	from	this],	the	thirty-six	peaceful	buddhas
7
	radiantly	manifest,
Amidst	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala	suffused	by	the	five	pristine	cognitions,
Their	bodies	composed	of	five	lights,	the	unimpeded	[union	of]	emptiness	and
radiance,
[Seated]	upon	a	tier	of	lotus,	sun	and	moon	[cushions],
Supported	by	lion,	elephant,	horse,	peacock	and	c
ῑ
vaṃc
ῑ
vaka	[thrones].
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
Within	the	expanse	of	a	seminal	point	located	at	the	centre	of	one’s	heart,
The	primordial	lord,	the	unchanging	buddha-body	of	light,
Samantabhadra,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	blue	in	colour,
And	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	expanse	of	reality,	white	in	colour,
Are	indivisibly	united,	both	in	the	posture	of	meditative	equipoise,
Seated	upon	lotus,	sun	and	moon	cushions,
[Symbolising	the	union	of]	radiance	and	emptiness.
To	you,	the	supreme	ancestors	of	the	buddhas	of	past,	present	and	future,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
8
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	pure	inner	radiance	of	reality	dawns,
May	we	be	welcomed	by	the	father	Samantabhadra	before	us,
May	we	be	supported	by	the	mother	Samantabhadr
ῑ
	behind	us;
And	 thus	 [encircled]	 may	 we	 be	 guided	 to	 the	 indivisible	 level	 of
Samantabhadra.
9
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
[In	the	channel	centre	of	one’s	heart]	is	Vairocana	in	blissful	union	with
Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
,

White	and	radiant,	holding	a	wheel	and	a	bell,
Seated	cross-legged,	[symbolising	the	union	of]	radiance	and	emptiness,
[Amidst	a	mass	of	light,	radiating	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse].
To	you,	the	principal	[deities]	of	the	central	Buddha	Family,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	delusion,
May	the	Transcendent	Lord	Vairocana	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse.
May	the	supreme	consort	[Akāśa]	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
10
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s	heart,
Is	Vajrasattva,	in	blissful	[union]	with	Buddhalocanā,
Blue	and	radiant,	holding	a	vajra	and	a	bell,
Seated	cross-legged,	[symbolising	the	union	of]	radiance	and	emptiness,
Amidst	a	mass	of	light	radiating	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition.
To	the	right	is	white	Kṣitigarbha,	holding	a	seedling	and	a	bell,
To	the	left	is	white	Maitreya,	holding	a	blossoming	orange	bush	and	a	bell,
To	the	front	is	white	Lāsyā,	holding	a	mirror	and	a	bell,
And	to	the	rear	is	white	Puṣpā,	holding	a	flower	and	seated	with	one	leg
extended	and	the	other	drawn	in.
To	you,	the	sixfold	principal	and	encircling	[deities]	of	the	Vajra	Family,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	aversion,
May	the	Transcendent	Lord	Vajrasattva	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition.

May	the	supreme	consort	Buddhalocanā	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	southern	channel	branch	of	one’s	heart,
Is	Ratnasambhava,	in	[blissful]	union	with	Māmak
ῑ
,
Yellow	[and	radiant],	holding	a	jewel	and	a	bell,
Seated	cross-legged,	[symbolising	the	union]	of	radiance	and	emptiness,
Amidst	a	mass	of	light,	radiating	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness.
To	the	right	is	yellow	Samantabhadra,	holding	a	grain-sheath	and	a	bell,
To	the	left	is	yellow	Akāśagarbha,	holding	a	sword	and	a	bell,
To	the	front	is	yellow	Mālyā,	holding	a	garland	and	seated	with	one	leg
extended	and	the	other	drawn	in,
And	to	the	rear	is	yellow	Dhūpā,	holding	incense	and	[also]	seated	with	one
leg	extended	and	the	other	drawn	in.
To	you,	the	sixfold	principal	and	encircling	[deities]	of	the	Ratna	Family,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	pride,
May	the	Transcendent	Lord	Ratnasambhava	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness.
May	the	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ
	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	western	channel	branch	of	one’s	heart,
Is	Amitābha,	in	blissful	union	with	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
,
Red	and	radiant,	holding	a	lotus	and	a	bell,
Seated	cross-legged,	[symbolising	the	union	of]	radiance	and	emptiness,
Amidst	a	mass	of	light,	radiating	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment.

To	the	right	is	red	Avalokiteśvara,	holding	a	lotus	and	a	bell,
To	the	left	is	red	Mañjuśr
ῑ
,	holding	a	sword	and	a	bell,
To	the	front	is	red	G
ῑ
tā,	holding	a	gong	and	seated	with	one	leg	extended	and
the	other	drawn	in,
And	to	the	rear	is	red	Alokā,	holding	a	butter	lamp,	and	[also]	seated	with	one
leg	extended	and	the	other	drawn	in.
To	you,	the	sixfold	principal	and	encircling	[deities]	of	the	Padma	Family,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	attachment,
May	the	Lord	Transcendent	Lord	Amitābha	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	northern	channel	branch	of	one’s	heart,
Is	Amoghasiddhi,	in	blissful	union	with	Samayatārā,
Green	and	radiant,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	bell,
Seated	cross-legged,	[symbolising	the	union	of]	radiance	and	emptiness,
Amidst	a	mass	of	light,	radiating	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.
To	the	right	is	green	Sarvanivāraṇaviśkambhin,	holding	a	book	and	a	bell,
To	the	left	is	green	Vajrapāṇi,	holding	a	vajra	and	a	bell,
To	the	front	is	green	Gandhā,	holding	a	conch	and	seated	with	one	leg
extended	and	the	other	drawn	in,
And	to	the	rear	is	green	Nart
ῑ
,	holding	a	food-offering,	and	[also]	seated	with
one	leg	extended	and	the	other	drawn	in.
To	you,	the	sixfold	principal	and	encircling	[deities]	of	the	Karma	Family,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	[die	and]	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,

And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	envy,
May	the	Transcendent	Lord	Amoghasiddhi	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Samayatārā	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	eastern	gate	of	one’s	heart,
Are	white	[Trailokya]vijaya	and	Aṅkuśā,
In	[blissful]	union,	and	dancing.
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	southern	gate	of	one’s	heart,
Are	yellow	Yamāntaka	and	Pāśā,
In	[blissful]	union,	and	dancing.
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	western	gate	of	one’s	heart,
Are	red	Hayagr
ῑ
va	and	Spoṭhā,
In	[blissful]	union,	and	dancing.
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	northern	gate	of	one’s	heart,
Are	green	Amṛtakuṇḍalin	and	Ghaṇṭā,
In	[blissful]	union,	and	dancing.
To	you,	the	eight	emanational	gatekeepers,	male	and	female,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual
tendencies,
May	the	four	Mahākrodha	male	gatekeepers	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined.
11
May	the	supreme	consorts,	the	four	female	gatekeepers,	support	us	from
behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.

	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	great
bliss	at	one’s	crown,
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	white	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Sakra,	sage	of	the	god	realms,	white	in	colour,	and	playing	a	lute.
May	he	obstruct	pride,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	god	realms!
	
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	one’s	occipital	channel,	which	resembles	the
horn	of	an	ox,
12
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	green	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Vemacitra,	sage	of	the	antigods,	green	in	colour,	bearing	armour	and
a	weapon,
May	he	obstruct	envy,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	antigod	realms!
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	one’s	‘life-force’	channel,	which	resembles	a
crystal	tube,
13
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	yellow	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Sākyamuni,	sage	of	human	beings,	yellow	in	colour,	and	carrying	a
mendicant’s	staff.
May	he	obstruct	attachment,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	human
realms!
	
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	energy	centre	of	one’s	navel,
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	blue	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Sthirasiṃha,	sage	of	animals,	blue	in	colour,	and	carrying	a	book.
May	he	obstruct	delusion,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	in	the	animal
realms!
	
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	channel	branch	at	one’s	bliss-sustaining
secret	place,
14
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	red	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Jvālamukha,	sage	of	the	anguished	spirits,	red	in	colour,	carrying	a
[wish-granting]	casket.
May	he	obstruct	miserliness,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	among	the
anguished-spirit	realms!
	

Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	energy	centre	at	the	soles	of	one’s	feet,
Within	a	radiant	and	vibrant	maṇḍala,	that	is	a	lustrous	black	seminal	point,
[Stands]	Yama	Dharmarāja,	sage	of	the	hell	beings,	black	in	colour,	and
carrying	a	flame	and	water.
May	he	obstruct	aversion,	which	is	the	entrance	to	rebirth	among	the	hell
realms!
	
To	you,	the	six	sages,	the	Buddha-bodies	of	Emanation,
Who	act	for	the	benefit	of	living	beings,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual
tendencies,
May	the	three	sages	of	the	higher	realms	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined.
May	the	three	sages	of	the	lower	realms	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	light	paths	of	the	six	impure	states	[of	existence],
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
The	forty-two	deities	of	the	peaceful	assembly	blaze	with	rays	of	light:
Radiant,	vibrant,	resplendent,	and	naturally	beautiful.
Their	bodies	are	supple,	slender,	handsome,	upright,	and	youthful,
Exquisitely	ornamented	and	[splendidly]	endowed	with	the	major	and	minor
marks.
To	you,	the	assembled	peaceful	deities	of	the	indestructible	expanse,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	the	five	deep-seated
poisons,
May	all	the	peaceful	male	deities	draw	us	forward,

Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	five	pristine	cognitions	combined.
May	the	supreme	female	consorts,	Queens	of	the	Expanse,	support	us	from
behind,
And	may	the	male	and	female	gatekeepers	support	us	from	the	perimeter,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
At	this	time	when	we	dwell	within	the	intermediate	state	of	living,
The	forty-two	assembled	peaceful	deities,
Are	radiantly	present	within	the	celestial	palace	of	our	own	hearts,
Embodied	in	the	form	of	a	cluster	of	five-coloured	lights.
Yet,	as	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
This	assembly	of	peaceful	deities	will	emerge	from	our	hearts,
And	fill	the	space	before	us.
Each	of	the	innumerable	central	and	peripheral	forms
Will	 be	 [fully	 endowed	 with]	 the	 ornaments	 and	 attire	 [of	 the	 peaceful
deities],
15
Each	 composed	 of	 the	 five-coloured	 lights	 [indicative	 of	 the	 union]	 of
radiance	and	emptiness,
And	[encircled]	by	an	expanse	of	rainbow	light.
Vibrant	beaming	shafts	of	light,	indicative	of	the	five	pristine	cognitions,
Emanating	five[-coloured]	seminal	points,	sounds,	lights	and	rays,
Radiant,	vibrant,	resplendent,	clear,	and	naturally	resonant,
Will	beam	out,	as	if	piercing	our	hearts.
Concomitant	with	these	lights	of	the	five	pristine	cognitions,
The	six	light	paths	indicative	of	the	six	classes	of	deluded	impure	beings	will
also	dawn	before	us.
At	this	moment,	O	compassionate	assembly	of	peaceful	deities,
Blessed	Transcendent	Ones,	Beings	of	Compassion,
Do	not	withhold	your	compassion,
But	draw	us	forward	on	the	path	[of	radiant	light],
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined,
And	draw	us	back	from	the	paths	[of	the	dull	lights],
Which	are	[the	doors	to]	the	six	states	of	impure	[existence]!

	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	celestial	palace	of	perfect	resource,	within	one’s	own	throat,
Amidst	an	expanse	permeated	with	rainbows	and	lights,
In	the	central	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,
Is	Padmanaṭeśvara,	the	great	Awareness	Holder	of	Maturation,
Red	and	radiant,	glowing	in	[an	array	of]	five[-coloured]	lights,
And	embraced	by	the	Ḍākin
ῑ
	of	Pristine	Cognition,
[Their	union	symbolising	the	coalescence	of]	bliss	and	emptiness.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-body	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	eastern	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	who	Abides	on	the	Levels,
White,	radiant,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	White	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-mind	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	southern	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	with	Power	over	the	Lifespan,
Yellow,	radiant,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	Yellow	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-attributes	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	western	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	of	the	Great	Seal,
Red,	radiant,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	Red	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,

Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-speech	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	northern	channel	branch	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect	resource,	within
one’s	throat,
Is	the	great	Awareness	Holder	of	Spontaneous	Presence,
Green,	radiant,	wrathful,	smiling,	and	embraced	by	the	Green	Ḍākin
ῑ.
[She	holds]	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,
Raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
May	the	awareness	holders	of	buddha-activity	protect	all	living	beings!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
To	you,	the	assembly	of	awareness	holders,	the	heroes	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual
tendencies,
May	the	heroic	awareness	holders	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	[luminance	of]	spontaneously	arising	pristine	cognition.
16
May	the	supreme	female	consorts,	the	assembly	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	support	us	from
behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	pure	fields	of	the	sky-farers.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
At	this	time	when	we	dwell	within	the	intermediate	state	of	living,
The	assemblies	of	awareness	holders,	both	heroes	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
Are	radiantly	present	within	the	celestial	palace	of	the	energy	centre	of	perfect
resource	within	our	own	throats,
Embodied	in	the	form	of	a	cluster	of	five-coloured	lights.
Yet,	as	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,

This	divine	assembly	of	the	awareness	holders	will	emerge	from	the	throat
[centre],
And	fill	the	space	before	us.
Amidst	a	plethora	of	musical	sounds	they	will	manifest	in	myriad	dancing
postures,
Pounding	and	vibrating	throughout	all	world-systems,
[And	generating]	a	vibrant	beaming	path	of	light,
Indicative	of	spontaneously	arising	pristine	cognition.
Simultaneously,	the	[light]	path	of	the	animal	realms,	indicative	of	delusion,
Will	[also]	dawn	before	us.
O	divine	assembly	of	awareness	holders,	at	that	moment,
Do	not	withhold	your	compassion,
But	draw	us	back	from	the	[dull-light]	path,
Which	is	the	gateway	to	the	deluded	animal-realms,
And	draw	all	beings	along	the	path	[of	light],
Which	is	[the	luminance	of]	spontaneously	arising	pristine	cognition!
Seize	us	with	your	compassion,
[Ensuring]	that	we	recognise	[the	characteristics	of]	the	intermediate	state!
Empower	us	so	that	we	may	become	awareness	holders,	children	of	the
Conquerors.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
At	the	crown-centre	of	onself,	[visualised]	as	Vajrasattva,
In	the	celestial	palace	of	the	blazing	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
Is	the	assembly	of	blood-drinking	deities,
17
	standing	in	clusters.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	central	channel	branch	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light,	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
[Stands]	Samantabhadra	in	the	form	of	Mahottara	Heruka.
He	has	three	faces:	brown,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
The	three	right	arms	brandish	a	vajra,	a	khaṭvāṅga,	and	a	small	drum,
And	the	left	hold	a	bell,	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	a	noose	of	entrails.

Mahottara	Heruka	is	joyously	and	indivisibly	embraced	by	Krodheśvar
ῑ.
May	these	two,	the	central	male	and	female	consorts,	guide	all	beings	[to
liberation]!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
On	a	throne	in	the	central	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light,	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
[Stands]	Vairocana	in	the	form	of	Buddha	Heruka.
He	has	three	faces:	reddish	brown,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
The	three	right	arms	brandish	a	wheel,	an	axe,	and	a	sword,
And	the	left	hold	a	bell,	a	ploughshare,	and	a	blood-filled	skull.
Buddha	Heruka	is	joyously	and	indivisibly	embraced	by	Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ.
May	these	two,	the	blood-drinking	deities	of	the	Sugata	Family,	guide	all
beings	[to	liberation]!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
On	[a	throne	in]	the	eastern	channel	branch	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light,	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
[Stands]	Vajrasattva	in	the	form	of	Vajra	Heruka.
He	has	three	faces:	dark	blue,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
The	three	right	arms	brandish	a	vajra,	a	skull,	and	an	axe,
And	the	left	hold	a	bell,	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	a	ploughshare.
Vajra	Heruka	is	joyously	and	indivisibly	embraced	by	Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ.
May	these	two,	the	blood-drinking	deities	of	the	Vajra	Family,	guide	all	beings
[to	liberation]!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
On	[a	throne	in]	the	southern	channel	branch	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light,	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
[Stands]	Ratnasambhava	in	the	form	of	Ratna	Heruka.
He	has	three	faces:	dark	yellow,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
The	three	right	arms	brandish	a	jewel,	a	khaṭvāṅga,	and	a	club,
And	the	left	hold	a	bell,	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	a	trident.
Ratna	Heruka	is	joyously	and	indivisibly	embraced	by	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ.

May	these	two,	the	blood-drinking	deities	of	the	Ratna	Family,	guide	all
beings	[to	liberation]!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
On	[a	throne	in]	the	western	channel	branch	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light,	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
[Stands]	Amitābha	in	the	form	of	Padma	Heruka.
He	has	three	faces:	dark	red,	white	and	blue;	and	six	arms:
The	three	right	arms	brandish	a	lotus,	a	khaṭvāṅga,	and	a	mace,
And	the	left	hold	a	bell,	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	a	small	drum.
Padma	Heruka	is	joyously	and	indivisibly	embraced	by	Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ.
May	these	two,	the	blood-drinking	deities	of	the	Padma	family,	guide	all
beings	[to	liberation]!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
On	[a	throne	in]	the	northern	channel	branch	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light,	composed	of	flaming	seminal	points	of	rainbow-
light,
[Stands]	Amoghasiddhi	in	the	form	of	Karma	Heruka.
He	has	three	faces:	dark	green,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
The	three	right	arms	brandish	a	sword,	a	khaṭvāṅga,	and	a	mace,
And	the	left	hold	a	bell,	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	a	ploughshare.
Karma	Heruka	is	joyously	and	indivisibly	embraced	by	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ.
May	these	two,	the	blood-drinking	deities	of	the	Karma	Family,	guide	all
beings	[to	liberation]!
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
To	you,	the	twelve	central,	male	and	female,	blood-drinking	deities,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	confused
perceptions,
May	 the	 conquerors,	 the	 male	 wrathful	 blood-drinking	 deities,	 draw	 us
forward,

Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	five	fully	perfect	pristine	cognitions.
May	the	assembly	of	wrathful	female	deities,	Queens	of	the	Expanse,	support
us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Gaur
ῑ
,	white	in	colour,	holding	a	human-corpse	cudgel	and	a	skull;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	southern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Caur
ῑ
,	yellow	in	colour,	shooting	an	arrow	from	a	bow;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	western	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Pramohā,	red	in	colour,	holding	a	crocodile	victory-banner;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	northern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Vetāl
ῑ
,	black	in	colour,	holding	a	vajra	and	a	blood-filled	skull;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	south-eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Pukkas
ῑ
,	red-yellow	in	colour,	clutching	and	devouring	entrails;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	south-western	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Ghasmar
ῑ
,	green-black	in	colour,	stirring	a	blood-filled	skull	with	a
vajra;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	north-western	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Caṇḍāl
ῑ
,	pale-yellow	in	colour,	[clutching]	a	human	corpse	and	eating
its	heart;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	north-eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	Smaśān
ῑ
,	Hblue-black	in	colour,	tearing	apart	the	head	and	body	of	a
bloated	corpse.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	ŪṂ
To	you,	the	Eight	Mātaraḥ,	beginning	with	Gaur
ῑ
,
[Who	are	embodiments]	of	the	[eight]	classes	[of	consciousness],
18
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,

And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	confused
perceptions,
May	the	four	Mātaraḥ,	beginning	with	Gaur
ῑ
,	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	light,
Which	is	[the	vibrance	of]	the	sounds,	lights	and	rays	[of	the	eight	classes	of
consciousness].
May	the	four	Mātaraḥ,	beginning	with	Pukkas
ῑ
,	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	lion-headed	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
,	brown-black	in	colour,	carrying	a	corpse	in
her	mouth;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	southern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	tiger-headed	Vyāghr
ῑ
mukh
ῑ
,	red	in	colour,	with	her	two	arms	crossed;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	western	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	fox-headed	Sṛgālamukh
ῑ
,	black	in	colour,	eating	entrails;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	northern	channel	branch	of	one’s	skull,
[Stands]	 wolf-headed	 Svānamukh
ῑ
,	 blue-black	 in	 colour,	 tearing	 apart	 a
bloated	corpse;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	south-eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s
skull,
[Stands]	 vulture-headed	 Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
,	 white-yellow	 in	 colour,	 carrying	 a
human	corpse	draped	over	her	shoulder;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	south-western	channel	branch	of	one’s
skull,
[Stands]	kite-headed	Kaṅkamukh
ῑ
,	red-black	in	colour,	carrying	a	large	human
corpse;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	north-western	channel	branch	of	one’s
skull,
[Stands]	crow-headed	Kākamukh
ῑ
,	black	in	colour,	brandishing	a	skull	and	a
sword;
Amidst	an	expanse	of	light	in	the	outer	north-eastern	channel	branch	of	one’s
skull,
[Stands]	owl-headed	Ulūkamukh
ῑ
,	dark	blue	in	colour,
19
	
holding	a	vajra.

	
[OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ]
To	you,	the	Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
,	beginning	with	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
,
[Who	are	embodiments]	of	the	[eight]	sensory	objects,
20
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	confused
perceptions,
May	the	four	Piśāc
ῑ
,	starting	with	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
,	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	pure	[radiant]	light,
Which	 is	 the	 purity	 of	 the	 naturally	 manifesting	 eight	 objects	 [of
consciousness].
May	the	four	Piśāc
ῑ
,	starting	with	Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
,	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	eastern	gate	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Is	horse-headed	[Aṅkuśā],	white	in	colour,	carrying	an	iron	hook	and	a	skull.
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	southern	gate	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Is	sow-headed	[Pāśā],	yellow	in	colour,	holding	a	noose	and	a	skull.
In	the	channel	branch	at	the	western	gate	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Is	lion-headed	[Sphoṭā],	red	in	colour,	holding	an	iron	chain	and	a	skull.
In	the	channel	branch	of	the	northern	gate	of	the	skull,	within	one’s	brain,
Is	snake-headed	[Ghaṇṭā],	green	in	colour,	holding	a	bell	and	a	skull.
21
To	 you,	 the	 Four	 Female	 Gatekeepers,	 who	 are	 pristine	 cognition	 in
emanational	form,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	confused
perceptions,

May	Aṅkuśā	and	Pāśā	draw	us	forward,
Obstructing	the	entrances	to	confusion	through	the	four	types	of	birth,
And	opening	the	doors	to	the	four	rites	of	pure	enlightened	activity.
May	Sphoṭā	and	Ghaṇṭā	support	us	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	minor	channels	of	the	eastern	outer	courtyard	of	one’s	skull,
[Stand]	the	six	Queens	of	Yoga	who	enact	the	rites	of	pacification:
Yak-headed	Manurākṣas
ῑ
,	brownish	white,	and	holding	a	vajra;
Snake-headed	Brahmāṇ
ῑ
,	yellowish	white,	and	holding	a	lotus;
Leopard-headed	Raudr
ῑ
,	greenish	white,	and	holding	a	trident;
Weasel-headed	Vaiṣṇāv
ῑ
,	bluish	white,	and	holding	a	wheel;
Brown	bear-headed	Kaumār
ῑ
,	reddish	white,	and	holding	a	short	pike;
And	black	bear-headed	Indrāṇ
ῑ
,	white,	and	holding	a	noose	of	entrails.
O	you,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	east,	who	enact	the	rites	of	pacification,
Perform	the	rites	which	pacify	our	fears	of	the	intermediate	state!
22
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	ŪṂ
In	the	minor	channels	of	the	southern	outer	courtyard	of	one’s	skull,
[Stand]	the	six	Queens	of	Yoga	who	enact	the	rites	of	enrichment:
Bat-headed	Vajrā,
23
	yellow,	and	holding	a	razor;
Crocodile-headed	Śānt
ῑ
,	reddish	yellow,	and	holding	a	vase;
Scorpion-headed	Amṛtā,	reddish	yellow,	and	holding	a	lotus;
Hawk-headed	Saum
ῑ
,	whitish	yellow,	and	holding	a	vajra;
Fox-headed	Daṇḍ
ῑ
,	greenish	yellow,	and	holding	a	cudgel;
And	tiger-headed	Rākṣas
ῑ
,	blackish	yellow,	and	drinking	from	a	blood-filled
skull.
O	you,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	south,	who	enact	the	rites	of	enrichment,
Perform	 the	 rites	 which	 enrich	 pristine	 cognition	 during	 the	 intermediate
state!
24
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	minor	channels	of	the	western	outer	courtyard	of	one’s	skull,

[Stand]	the	six	Queens	of	Yoga	who	enact	the	rites	of	subjugation:
Vulture-headed	Bhakṣas
ῑ
,	greenish	red,	and	holding	a	club;
Horse-headed	Rat
ῑ
,	red,	and	holding	a	human	torso;
Garuḍa-headed	Rudhiramad
ῑ
,	pale	red,	and	holding	a	cudgel;
Dog-headed	Ekacāriṇ
ῑ
	Rākṣas
ῑ
,	red,	and	holding	a	vajra;
Hoopoe-headed	Manohārikā,	red,	and	firing	an	arrow	from	a	bow;
And	deer-headed	Siddhikar
ῑ
,	greenish	red,	and	holding	a	vase.
O	you,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	west,	who	enact	the	rites	of	subjugation,
Perform	the	rites	which	assure	our	independence	during	the	intermediate
state!
25
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
In	the	minor	channels	of	the	northern	outer	courtyard	of	one’s	skull,
[Stand]	the	six	Queens	of	Yoga	who	enact	the	rites	of	wrath:
Wolf-headed	Vāyudev
ῑ
,	bluish	green,	and	brandishing	an	ensign;
Ibex-headed	Agnāy
ῑ
,	reddish	green,	and	holding	a	firebrand;
Sow-headed	Varāh
ῑ
,	blackish	green,	and	holding	a	noose	of	fangs;
Crow-headed	Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ
,	reddish	green,	and	holding	an	infant	human	corpse;
Elephant-headed	Bhujanā,	blackish	green,	and	holding	a	bloated	corpse;
And	snake-headed	Varuṇān
ῑ
,	bluish	green,	and	holding	a	noose	of	snakes.
O	you,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	north,	who	enact	the	rites	of	wrath,
Perform	 the	 rites	 which	 utterly	 destroy	 the	 confused	 perceptions	 of	 the
intermediate	state!
26
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
At	the	[outer]	eastern	gate	of	one’s	skull	is	Vajrā	[Mahākāl
ῑ
],
White,	cuckoo-headed,	and	holding	an	iron	hook;
At	the	[outer]	southern	gate	of	one’s	skull	is	Vajrā	[Mahāchāgalā],
Yellow,	goat-headed,	and	holding	a	noose;
At	the	[outer]	western	gate	of	one’s	skull	is	Vajrā	[Mahākumbhakarṇ
ῑ
],
Red,	lion-headed,	and	holding	an	iron	chain;
And	at	the	[outer]	northern	gate	of	one’s	skull	is	Vajrā	[Lambodarā],
Dark	green,	snake-headed,	and	holding	a	bell.
O	 you,	 the	 four	 female	 gatekeepers,	 Queens	 [of	 Yoga]	 who	 enact	 the
emanational	rites,
Perform	the	rites	which	obstruct	the	doors	[leading]	to	[mundane]	rebirth	from

the	intermediate	state!
27
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
To	you,	the	Twenty-eight	Iśvar
ῑ
,	Queens	of	Yoga,
I	bow	down,	make	offerings,	take	refuge,	and	pray:
As	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
At	that	very	moment,	when	the	visions	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
dawn,
And	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	confused
perceptions,
May	the	seven	Iśvar
ῑ
	of	the	east	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	[a	vibrance	of]	sounds,	lights	and	rays.
May	the	seven	Iśvar
ῑ
	of	the	south	support	us	from	behind,
May	the	seven	Iśvar
ῑ
	of	the	west	support	us	from	the	perimeter,
And	may	the	seven	Iśvar
ῑ
	of	the	north	destroy	[and	liberate]	our	enemies,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
At	this	time	when	we	dwell	within	the	intermediate	state	of	living,
The	assembly	of	the	sixty	blood-drinking	deities
28
Is	radiantly	present	within	the	celestial	palace	of	the	skull,	at	the	crown-centre,
within	one’s	brain	—
Embodied	in	the	form	of	a	cluster	of	five-coloured	lights.
Yet,	as	soon	as	we	die	and	begin	to	transmigrate,
This	assembly	of	blood-drinking	deities	will	emerge	from	the	brain,
And	appear	[before	us],	filling	the	entire	trichiliocosm.
[Each	of]	the	central	and	peripheral	[forms]
Will	be	endowed	with	fearsome	ornaments	and	attire.
[Resounding]	within	an	immense	space,
Vibrant	with	sounds,	lights	and	rays,
The	bodily	demeanour	of	these	wrathful	deities
Will	be	elegant,	heroic	and	terrifying,
Their	roar	wild,	murderous	and	awesome,

Each	blazing	with	compassion,	wrath	and	fierce	aversion,
Adorned	by	face	markings	of	human	ash,	blood,	and	grease;
29
Dressed	in	skirts	of	moist	hide	and	flayed	tiger	skin;
Decorated	with	skull	garlands	and	wreaths	of	snakes;
Resplendent	in	a	blazing	mass	of	fire	which	pounds
With	the	cries	of	‘HA	HA	HŪṂ	PHAṬ	Strike!	Slay!’,
Reverberating	like	a	thousand	peals	of	thunder.
Fully	arrayed	with	hand-emblems	and	multifarious	faces,
Displaying	the	arts	of	transformation,
They	will	pulverise	and	rock	the	infinite	trichiliocosm.
At	that	very	moment	when	the	fierce	sounds,	lights	and	rays
Dawn	before	us	in	terrifying	manifestation,
O	you,	the	compassionate	assembly	of	wrathful	blood-drinking	deities,
O	Beings	of	Compassion,	do	not	withhold	your	compassion	at	that	[time]!
As	we	roam	[alone]	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual
tendencies,
May	the	assembly	of	wrathful	blood-drinking	[deities]	draw	us	forward,
Leading	us	on	the	path	of	[radiant]	light,
Which	is	free	of	fear	and	terrifying	perceptions!
May	the	assembly	of	wrathful	female	deities,	Queens	of	the	Expanse,	support
us	from	behind!
May	the	assembly	of	the	Mātaraḥ,	Piśāc
ῑ
,	and	Female	Gatekeepers	support	us
from	the	perimeter!
May	the	Eight	Great	Projectresses	[who	propel	beings	to	exalted	rebirths],
Propel	us	from	our	[mundane]	states	[into	higher	rebirth]!
May	the	diverse	animal-headed	Iśvar
ῑ
	eliminate	all	obstacles!
May	 the	 four	 supreme	 Female	 Gatekeepers	 obstruct	 the	 entrance	 to
[mundane]	births;
And	thus	[encircled],	may	we	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfected	buddha.
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ
When	we	roam	alone,	separated	from	our	loved	ones,
And	[myriad]	images	of	emptiness	arise,	naturally	manifesting,
May	the	buddhas	[quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	 may	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 awesome	 and	 terrifying	 intermediate	 state	 be

annulled.
When	the	radiant	light	path	of	pristine	cognition	dawns,
May	we	recognise	[its	nature],	without	awe	and	without	terror,
And	as	the	[manifold]	forms	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise,
May	we	be	fearlessly	confident,	and	recognise	[the	characteristics	of]	the
intermediate	state.
When	we	experience	suffering,	as	the	result	of	negative	past	actions,
May	our	meditational	deities	utterly	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	[all	sounds]	be	heard	as	the	sacred	resonance	of	the	Greater	Vehicle.
When	we	are	driven	on	by	past	actions,	without	a	refuge,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One,	Mahākāruṇika,	protect	us,
And	as	we	experience	suffering	generated	by	habitual	tendencies	and	past
actions,
May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
May	the	fields
30
	
of	the	five	elements	not	rise	up	as	a	hostile	force,
But	may	we	see	these	as	the	buddha	fields	of	the	five	enlightened	families!
31
	
By	the	blessing	of	the	spiritual	teachers	of	the	oral	lineage,
By	the	compassion	of	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,
And	by	the	force	of	the	purity	of	my	altruistic	aspiration,
May	all	the	aspirational	prayers,	here	expressed,
Be	immediately	realised.
CONCLUSION
If	one	consistently	perseveres	in	this	
Spiritual	Practice
	of	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,	together	with	the	recitation	of	the	aspirational	prayers,	even	the
negativity	 and	 obscurations	 caused	 by	 past	 actions	 which	 involve	 the	 five
inexpiable	crimes	will	be	purified.	Even	the	very	hell	realms	themselves	[can]	be
stirred	[by	the	power	of	this	practice].	If	this	practice	is	followed,	there	is	no
doubt	that	one	will	be	born	as	an	awareness	holder	amongst	the	fields	of	the
Conquerors.	For	it	is	said	in	the	transmitted	precepts	of	the	Transcendent	One
Samantabhadra	himself:

	
‘One	who	respectfully	pays	homage	to	the	maṇḍala
Of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	
Magical	Net
,
Will	purify	each	and	every	transgression	[of	the	commitments].
Even	the	negativity	of	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	will	be	purified.
Even	the	hell	realms	themselves	may	be	stirred	[by	the	force	of	this	practice],
And	one	will	become	recognised	as	an	awareness	holder,
Among	the	fields	of	the	Conquerors.’
	
The	advantages	which	accrue	from	engaging	in	the	
Spiritual	Practice
	
as	here	set
down,	are	extremely	great.	It	is	said	that	just	by	simply	hearing,	once,	the	names
of	the	deities	of	this	maṇḍala,	one	will	avoid	rebirth	in	the	lower	existences,	and
buddhahood	will	eventually	be	attained.	Samantabhadra	himself	has	said:
	
‘If	anyone	hears,	only	once,	the	names	of	these	deities	of	the	maṇḍala,	he	or
she	will	be	saved	from	falling	into	the	great	hells.’
	
And:
	
‘Anyone	who	respectfully	pays	homage
To	the	natural	maṇḍala	of	the	
Magical	Net
,
Will	purify	each	and	every	transgression	[of	the	commitments].
The	commitments	will	be	repaired,	and	accomplishments	attained.’
	
Therefore,	since	the	advantages	of	following	this	practice	are	beyond	expression,
one	should	persevere	with	this	
Spiritual	Practice
	
and	[consistently]	visualise
one’s	own	body	as	the	assembly	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	Thus,	the
supreme	and	common	accomplishments	will	be	attained	in	this	very	life;	and
after	one	has	died,	when	the	visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	dawn
during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,	one	will	dissolve	indivisibly	with	the
meditational	deities,	and	buddhahood	will	be	attained.
32
	Experientially	cultivate
this	[
Spiritual	Practice
]!	Do	not	forget	its	words	and	meanings	even	if	you	were
to	be	pursued	by	a	hundred	assassins.	Embrace	it!	Hold	it	[to	your	heart]!	Read	it
aloud!	Comprehend	it	in	its	entirety!	Keep	it	in	mind,	fully	and	accurately!
This	most	lucid	
Spiritual	Practice
,	which	is	a	coalescence	of	the	[full	means
of	accomplishment	of	the]	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	is	the	experiential

cultivation	 associated	 with	 the	
Liberation	 by	 Hearing	 in	 the	 Intermediate
States.
33
	It	is	the	essence	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	The	Ritual
Purification	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings.
34
	It	is	a	supporting	text	to
the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Awareness:	Secret	Empowerment	of	the	Intermediate
States
,
35
	 and	 it	 is	 the	 main	 practice	 associated	 with	 the	
Reparation	 [of
Commitments]	and	Confession:	Natural	Liberation	of	Transgressions.
36
	It	is	the
path	of	liberation	followed	by	fortunate	beings.	May	[the	influence	of]	this
Spiritual	Practice:	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
	not	be	exhausted
until	cyclic	existence	has	been	emptied.
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya	dge’o

6
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through
[Enactment	of]	the	Hundredfold	Homage	to	the	Sacred
Enlightened	Families
CONTEXT
This	practice	reinforces	the	previous	meditation,	taking	the	form	of	a
physical	prostration	to	each	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	in	turn.
This	
Hundredfold	Homage
	can	be	done	on	its	own	or	immediately	after
the	practice	of	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
.	It	can	also
be	practised	whenever	feast-offerings	are	performed	in	conjunction	with
The	Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings
	or	whenever	the	practitioner	makes
offerings	of	incense,	flowers	and	butter-lamps	to	the	deities.
Practitioners	should	make	these	prostrations	while	clearly	visualising
before	 them	 the	 form	 of	 the	 deity,	 in	 perfect	 detail,	 and	 while
experientially	cultivating	the	deity’s	nature	and	the	inner	meaning	of	the
symbolism.	Also,	as	the	colophon	recommends,	the	practitioner	should
concurrently:	‘mentally	admit	and	feel	remorse	for	all	one’s	negativities
and	obscurations,	which	have	been,	are	being	and	will	be	accumulated.’
Herein	is	contained	an	ancillary	chapter	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
,
1
	entitled	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
through	[Enactment	of]	the	Hundredfold	Homage
,
2
	[which	is	an	extract	from]
the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities:	 A	 Profound	 Sacred	 Teaching,	 [entitled]
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
3
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra	and	Mahottara,
To	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,
And	to	the	assembly	of	the	hundred	sacred	enlightened	families.
Having	purified	all	negativity	and	obscurations,
May	I	act	so	as	to	guide	all	beings	to	the	pure	buddha	fields!

	
I	[now]	present	this	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through
[Enactment	 of	 the	 Hundredfold]	 Homage
,	 a	 method	 for	 performing	 a
hundredfold	homage	to	the	infinite	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	hundred
sacred	 enlightened	 families,	 by	 which	 negativity	 and	 obscuration	 may	 be
purified.	Cherish	your	zeal	in	this	[practice]	throughout	the	three	times!
	
NAMO!
4
I	bow	down	to
5
	Samantabhadra,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
Father	of	all	buddhas,	the	natural	purity	of	mental	consciousness,
The	primary	buddha,	unchanging	body	of	light,
Sky	[blue],	and	seated	in	the	posture	of	meditative	equipoise.
	
I	bow	down	to	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	supreme	consort,
Natural	purity	of	the	sensory	spectrum	of	phenomena,
6
Stainless	white,	like	crystal,
Mother	of	all	buddhas	of	past,	present	and	future,
Joyously	embracing	her	consort,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vairocana,	[manifestation	of]	supreme	buddha-body,
The	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	form,
Pure	without	renunciation	of	delusion,
Conch	[white],	holding	a	wheel	and	a	bell,
[Seated]	on	an	exalted	throne	supported	by	lions,
The	[resplendent]	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vajrasattva,	[manifestation	of]	supreme	buddha-mind,
The	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	consciousness,
Pure	without	renunciation	of	aversion,
Azure	[blue],	holding	a	vajra	and	a	bell,
[Seated]	on	an	exalted	throne	supported	by	elephants,
The	[resplendent]	mirror-like	pristine	cognition.
	
I	bow	down	to	Ratnasambhava,	[manifestation	of	supreme]	buddha	attributes,
The	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	feeling,

Pure	without	renunciation	of	pride,
Golden	[yellow],	holding	a	jewel	and	a	bell,
[Seated]	on	an	exalted	throne	supported	by	horses,
The	[resplendent]	pristine	cognition	of	sameness.
	
I	bow	down	to	Amitābha,	[manifestation	of]	supreme	buddha-speech,
The	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	perceptions,
Pure	without	renunciation	of	attachment,
Copper	[red],	holding	a	lotus	and	a	bell,
[Seated]	on	an	exalted	throne	supported	by	peacocks,
The	[resplendent]	pristine	cognition	of	discernment.
	
I	bow	down	to	Amoghasiddhi,	[manifestation	of	supreme]	buddha	activities,
The	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies,
Pure	without	renunciation	of	envy,
Turquoise	[green],	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	bell,
[Seated]	on	an	exalted	throne	supported	by	
c
ῑ
vaṃc
ῑ
vaka
	birds,
The	[resplendent]	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.
	
I	bow	down	to	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
,	the	supreme	consort,
The	mother	of	the	Buddha	Family,	natural	purity	of	space,
Moonlike	[white],	holding	a	wheel	and	a	bell,
Joyously	embracing	her	consort,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Buddhalocanā,	the	supreme	consort,
The	mother	of	the	Vajra	Family,	natural	purity	of	earth,
Beryl	[blue],	holding	a	vajra	and	a	bell,
Joyously	embracing	her	consort,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Māmak
ῑ
,	the	supreme	consort,
The	mother	of	the	Ratna	Family,	natural	purity	of	water,
Minium	[orange],	holding	a	jewel	and	a	bell,
Joyously	embracing	her	consort,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
,	the	supreme	consort,
The	mother	of	the	Padma	Family,	natural	purity	of	fire,

Fire-crystal	[red],	holding	a	lotus	and	a	bell,
Joyously	embracing	her	consort,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Samayatārā,	the	supreme	consort,
The	mother	of	the	Karma	Family,	natural	purity	of	wind,
Sapphire	[green],	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	bell,
Joyously	embracing	her	consort,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Kṣitigarbha,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit	of
beings,
The	natural	purity	of	visual	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Snow-mountain	[white],	holding	a	seedling	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Maitreya,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	auditory	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Cloud-white,	holding	a	blossoming	orange	bush	and	a	bell.
I	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit	of
beings,
The	natural	purity	of	olfactory	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Amber	[yellow],	holding	a	grain-sheath	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Akāśagarbha,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit	of
beings,
The	natural	purity	of	gustatory	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Burnished	golden	[yellow],	holding	a	sword	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Avalokiteśvara,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit	of
beings,
The	natural	purity	of	tactile	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Coral	[red],	holding	a	lotus	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Mañjuśr
ῑ
kumārabhūta,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the
benefit	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	mental	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Minium	[orange],	holding	a	lily	and	a	bell.
	

I	bow	down	to	Nivāraṇaviśkambhin,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit
of	beings,
The	 natural	 purity	 of	 the	 ‘ground-of-all’	 consciousness,	 transcendent	 of
renunciation,
[Green]	as	the	night-flowering	lotus,	holding	a	book	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vajrapāṇi,	male	bodhisattva	who	acts	for	the	benefit	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	‘defiled’	consciousness,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Emerald	[green],	holding	a	vajra	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	white	Lāsyā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	[delight]
The	eyes	of	[all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	natural	purity	of	visual	phenomena,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Quartz	[white],	holding	a	mirror	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	white	Puṣpā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	delight
[The	minds	of	all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	natural	purity	of	past	conceptual	thoughts,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Pearl	[white],	holding	a	white	lotus	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	yellow	Mālyā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	gestures	delight
[The	minds	of	all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	 natural	 purity	 of	 indeterminate	 conceptual	 thoughts,	 transcendent	 of
renunciation,
Saffron	[yellow],	holding	a	garland	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	yellow	Dhūpā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	[delight]
The	noses	of	[all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	natural	purity	of	fragrance,	transcendent	of	renunciation,	Golden	[yellow]
in	colour,	holding	sweet-smelling	incense	and	a	censer.
	
I	bow	down	to	red	G
ῑ
tā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	[delight]
The	ears	of	[all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	natural	purity	of	sound,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Marsh	mallow	[pink],	and	playing	a	lute.
	

I	bow	down	to	red	Alokā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	[delight]
The	eyes	of	[all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	natural	purity	of	future	conceptual	thoughts,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Lotus	[pink],	and	holding	a	glowing	butter	lamp.
I	bow	down	to	green	Gandhā,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	[delight]
The	bodies	of	[all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	 natural	 purity	 of	 present	 conceptual	 thoughts,	 transcendent	 of
renunciation,
Poppy	[green],	holding	a	perfume-filled	conch.
	
I	bow	down	to	green	Nart
ῑ
,	[female	bodhisattva]	whose	offerings	[delight]
The	tongues	of	[all]	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	past,	present	and	future,
The	natural	purity	of	taste,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Marine	[green],	holding	a	[deliciously]	nutritious	food-offering.
	
I	bow	down	to	[Trailokya-]Vijaya,	[male	gatekeeper]	whose	wrathful	presence
Guards	against	obstacles	at	the	eastern	gate,
The	natural	purity	of	eternalist	views,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
White,	holding	a	cudgel	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Yamāntaka,	[male	gatekeeper]	whose	wrathful	presence
Guards	against	obstacles	at	the	southern	gate,
The	natural	purity	of	nihilistic	views,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Yellow,	holding	a	skull-club	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Hayagr
ῑ
varāja,	[male	gatekeeper]	whose	wrathful	presence
Guards	against	obstacles	at	the	western	gate,
The	natural	purity	of	egotistical	views,	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Red,	holding	an	iron	chain	and	a	bell.
	
I	bow	down	to	Amṛtakuṇḍalin,	[male	gatekeeper]	whose	wrathful	presence
Guards	against	obstacles	at	the	northern	gate,
The	natural	purity	of	substantialist	views,
7
	transcendent	of	renunciation,
Green,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	bell.
	
I	 bow	 down	 to	 Vajrāṅkuśā,	 [female	 gatekeeper]	 whose	 immeasurable

compassion
Guides	the	six	classes	[of	beings]	away	from	[their	mundane]	realms,
White,	holding	an	iron	hook	that	attracts,
She	embraces	her	wrathful	consort	in	blissful	union.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vajrapāśā,	[female	gatekeeper]	whose	immeasurable	loving
kindness
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
Yellow,	holding	a	noose	that	lassoes,
She	embraces	her	wrathful	consort	in	blissful	union.
	
I	 bow	 down	 to	 Vajrasphoṭā,	 [female	 gatekeeper]	 whose	 immeasurable
sympathetic	joy
Embraces	[each	and	every]	living	being,
Red,	holding	an	iron	chain	that	binds,
She	embraces	her	wrathful	consort	in	blissful	union.
	
I	 bow	 down	 to	 Vajraghaṇṭā,	 [female	 gatekeeper]	 whose	 immeasurable
equanimity
Transcends	discrimination	between	living	beings,
Green,	holding	a	bell	that	summons,
She	embraces	her	wrathful	consort	in	blissful	union.
	
I	bow	down	to	Indraśakra,	[sage]	whose	emanational	buddha	form
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	pride,	and	guide	of	the	god	realms,
White	and	holding	a	lute.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vemacitra,	[sage]	whose	emanational	buddha	form
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	envy,	and	guide	of	the	antigod	realms,
Green,	holding	armour	and	a	weapon.
I	bow	down	to	Sākyamuni,	[sage]	whose	emanational	buddha	form
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	attachment,	and	guide	of	the	human	realms,
Yellow,	holding	a	begging	bowl	and	staff.

	
I	bow	down	to	Sthirasiṃha,	[sage]	whose	emanational	buddha	form
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	delusion,	and	guide	of	the	animal	realms,
Blue,	and	holding	a	book.
	
I	 bow	 down	 to	 the	 transcendent	 Jvālamukha,	 [sage]	 whose	 emanational
buddha	form
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	miserliness,	and	guide	of	the	anguished-spirit	realms,
Red,	and	holding	a	bejewelled	casket.
	
I	bow	down	to	Dharmarāja,	[sage]	whose	emanational	buddha	form
Acts	[ceaselessly]	on	behalf	of	beings,
The	natural	purity	of	aversion,	and	guide	of	the	hell	realms,
Black,	and	holding	a	warming	flame	and	cooling	water.
	
I	bow	down	to	Mahottara	Heruka,	who	has	three	faces,
Dark	brown,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
A	vajra,	khaṭvāṅga,	and	small	drum	in	his	right	hands,
And	a	bell,	blood-filled	skull,	and	noose	of	entrails	in	his	left.
	
I	bow	down	to	Buddha	Heruka,	who	has	three	faces,
Dark	brown,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
A	wheel,	axe,	and	sword	in	his	right	hands,
And	a	bell,	ploughshare,	and	blood-filled	skull	in	his	left.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vajra	Heruka,	who	has	three	faces,
Dark	blue,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
A	vajra,	blood-filled	skull,	and	axe	in	his	right	hands,
And	a	bell,	blood-filled	skull,	and	ploughshare	in	his	left.
I	bow	down	to	Ratna	Heruka,	who	has	three	faces,
Dark	yellow,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
A	jewel,	khaṭvāṅga,	and	mace	in	his	right	hands,
And	a	bell,	blood-filled	skull,	and	trident	in	his	left.
	

I	bow	down	to	Padma	Heruka,	who	has	three	faces,
Dark	red,	white	and	blue;	and	six	arms:
A	lotus,	khaṭvāṅga,	and	cudgel	in	his	right	hands,
And	a	bell,	blood-filled	skull,	and	small	drum	in	his	left.
	
I	bow	down	to	Karma	Heruka,	who	has	three	faces,
Dark	green,	white	and	red;	and	six	arms:
A	sword,	khaṭvāṅga,	and	cudgel	in	his	right	hands,
And	a	bell,	blood-filled	skull,	and	ploughshare	in	his	left.
	
I	bow	down	to	Krodheśvar
ῑ
,	wrathful	Queen	of	[Reality’s]	Expanse,
Dark	blue,	holding	a	vajra,
Offering	a	blood-filled	skull	to	her	consort’s	mouth,
She	joyously	embraces	him,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ
,	the	Buddha	Queen	of	[Reality’s]	Expanse,
Red-brown,	holding	a	wheel,
Offering	a	blood-filled	skull	to	her	consort’s	mouth,
She	joyously	embraces	him,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ
,	Vajra	Queen	of	[Reality’s]	Expanse,
Pale	blue,	holding	a	vajra,
Offering	a	blood-filled	skull	to	her	consort’s	mouth,
She	joyously	embraces	him,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ
,	Ratna	Queen	of	[Reality’s]	Expanse,
Pale	yellow,	holding	a	jewel,
Offering	a	blood-filled	skull	to	her	consort’s	mouth,
She	joyously	embraces	him,	in	supreme	bliss.
I	bow	down	to	Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ
,	Padma	Queen	of	[Reality’s]	Expanse,
Pale	red,	holding	a	lotus,
Offering	a	blood-filled	skull	to	her	consort’s	mouth,
She	joyously	embraces	him,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ
,	Karma	Queen	of	[Reality’s]	Expanse,
Pale	green,	holding	a	crossed-vajra,

Offering	a	blood-filled	skull	to	her	consort’s	mouth,
She	joyously	embraces	him,	in	supreme	bliss.
	
I	bow	down	to	Gaur
ῑ
	of	the	eastern	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	white,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
Brandishing	a	human	corpse	as	a	cudgel
To	destroy	the	conceptual	landscape	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	Caur
ῑ
	of	the	southern	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	yellow,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
Shooting	an	arrow	from	a	bow
To	bind	indivisibly	skilful	means	and	discriminative	awareness.
	
I	bow	down	to	Pramohā	of	the	western	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	red,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
Holding	a	crocodile	victory-banner
To	resist	[the	seductions	of]	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	Vetāl
ῑ
	of	the	northern	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	black,
8
	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
Holding	a	vajra	and	a	blood-filled	skull
[To	sustain	recognition	of]	the	unchanging	reality.
	
I	bow	down	to	Pukkas
ῑ
	of	the	south-eastern	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	red-yellow,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
[Clutching	and]	devouring	entrails
To	draw	[sentient	beings]	free	from	the	dissonant	realms.
	
I	bow	down	to	Ghasmar
ῑ
	of	the	south-western	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	green-black,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,

Drinking	blood	from	a	skull
To	consume	[the	turning	circle	of]	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	Caṇḍāl
ῑ
	of	the	north-western	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	pale	yellow,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
Tearing	apart	the	head	and	body	of	a	bloated	corpse
To	sever	erroneous	thoughts	[at	their	roots].
	
I	bow	down	to	Smaśān
ῑ
	of	the	north-eastern	direction,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	as	one	of	the	Mātaraḥ,
Wrathful,	blue-black,	and	aloof	on	her	throne	of	human	corpses,
Tearing	apart	[the	head	from]	a	human	corpse
To	sever	the	buttresses	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	brown-black,	lion-headed	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Carrying	a	corpse	in	her	mouth,	and	shaking	her	mane
To	stir	cyclic	existence	to	its	depths.
	
I	bow	down	to	red,	tiger-headed	Vyāghr
ῑ
mukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
With	her	two	arms	crossed,	and	staring	with	bulging	eyes
To	overwhelm	attachment	to	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	black,	fox-headed	Sṛgālamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Brandishing	a	razor,	and	devouring	lungs	and	a	heart
To	purify	dissonant	mental	states	in	their	basic	nature.
	
I	bow	down	to	blue-black,	wolf-headed	Svānamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Tearing	apart	a	corpse,	and	staring	with	bulging	eyes
To	stir	the	pit	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	white-yellow,	vulture-headed	Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
,

Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Clawing	a	bloated	corpse,	and	extracting	the	entrails
To	sever	the	three	poisons	from	their	roots.
	
I	bow	down	to	red-black,	kite-headed	Kaṅkamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Carrying	a	bloated	corpse,	draped	over	her	shoulder
To	extract	[beings]	from	the	pit	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	black,	crow-headed	Kākamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Brandishing	a	sword,	and	drinking	blood	from	a	skull
To	consume	and	liberate	dissonant	mental	states.
	
I	bow	down	to	blue-black,	owl-headed	Ulūkamukh
ῑ
,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Holding	an	iron	hook,
9
	and	carrying	a	blood-filled	skull
To	draw	[beings]	free	from	the	false	mentality	of	cyclic	existence.
	
I	bow	down	to	horse-headed	Aṅkuśā	at	the	eastern	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Horse-headed,	white,	and	holding	an	iron	hook,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	compassion
Guiding	[those	trapped	in]	cyclic	existence	away	from	the	lower	realms.
	
I	bow	down	to	sow-headed	Pāśā	at	the	southern	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Sow-headed,	yellow,	and	holding	a	noose,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	loving	kindness
Constricting	the	false	mentality	[of	beings].
I	bow	down	to	lion-headed	Sphoṭā	at	the	western	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Lion-headed,	red,	and	holding	an	iron	chain,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	sympathetic	joy
Shackling	the	dissonant	mental	states	generated	by	ignorance.
10
	

I	bow	down	to	snake-headed	Gaṇṭhā	at	the	northern	gate,
Acting	on	behalf	of	living	beings	in	the	form	of	a	female	gatekeeper,
Snake-headed,	green,	and	holding	a	bell,
The	force	of	her	immeasurable	equanimity
Subduing	the	cognitive	resonances	of	the	five	poisons.
11
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Casts	a	Noose,
12
Manifestation	of	the	natural	purity	of	reality,
Clothed	in	flayed	hides,	she	unites	the	three	levels	of	existence
With	the	[pure	buddha]	fields,	however	these	may	manifest,
And	casts	her	noose	of	solar	rays,
Projecting	[beings	of]	the	trichiliocosm	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Casts	a	Pike,
13
[Holding]	a	blood-filled	skull,	and	casting	a	pike,
She	purifies	the	five	dissonant	mental	states
To	dispel	permanently	the	diseases	of	conceptual	thought,
The	force	of	her	compassion,	rich	in	skilful	means,
Projecting	human	beings	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Rings	a	Bell,
14
Holding	to	her	heart	a	blood-filled	skull,
She	subjugates	the	entire	trichiliocosm
To	secure	ignorant	sentient	beings	in	[reality’s]	expanse,
The	resonance	of	her	charisma
Projecting	[beings	of]	the	chiliocosm	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Carries	a	Garuḍa,
15
Her	body	an	exquisite	white-yellow,
[Signifying]	her	proficiency	in	the	rites	of	pacification	and	enrichment.
Holding	to	her	heart	a	blood-filled	skull
To	overpower	the	five	sensory	desires,
She	carries	a	vajra	and	a	large	garuḍa,
Projecting	the	gods	into	higher	rebirths.
	

I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Casts	a	Shooting	Star,
16
Her	awesome	body	an	exquisite	blue-black,
[Holding]	a	vajra	and	casting	a	shooting	star
To	avert	the	intensity	of	‘The	Great	Battle’,
17
She	drinks	blood	from	a	skull,
Projecting	the	antigods	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Holds	a	Thunderbolt-garland,
18
Her	body	part	red	and	part	black,
[Signifying	proficiency	in	the	rites	of]	subjugation	and	wrath,
Her	facial	expression	fixed	in	domination.
To	purify	and	ease	outer	and	inner	obscurations,
[She	wields]	a	vajra	and	thunderbolt-garland,
Projecting	anguished	spirits	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Wields	an	Eagle-feathered	Banner,
19
Her	body	part	white	and	part	black,
[Signifying]	her	proficiency	in	the	rites	of	pacification	and	wrath,
Drinking	blood	from	a	skull
To	dissolve	delusion	[into	emptiness],
[She	holds]	a	vajra	and	wields	an	eagle-feathered	banner,
Projecting	animals	into	higher	rebirths.
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Projectress	who	Holds	a	Sword,
20
Her	body	part	yellow	and	part	black,
[Signifying]	her	proficiency	in	the	rites	of	enrichment	and	wrath,
Drinking	blood	from	a	skull
To	dissolve	the	hells	into	emptiness,
[She	holds]	a	vajra	and	a	sword,
Projecting	the	hell-beings	into	higher	rebirths.
I	bow	down	to	yak-headed	Manurākṣas
ῑ
,
The	brownish	white	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra	and	skull.
	
I	bow	down	to	snake-headed	Brahmāṇ
ῑ
,
The	yellowish	white	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra	and	lotus.

	
I	bow	down	to	leopard-headed	Raudr
ῑ
,
The	greenish	white	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra	and	trident.
	
I	bow	down	to	weasel-headed	Vaiṣṇāv
ῑ
,
The	bluish	white	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra	and	wheel.
	
I	bow	down	to	brown	bear-headed	Kaumār
ῑ
,
The	reddish	white	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra	and	pike.
	
I	bow	down	to	black	bear-headed	Indrāṇ
ῑ
,
The	white	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra	and	noose	of	entrails.
	
I	bow	down	to	bat-headed	Vajrā,
21
The	yellow	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	jewel	and	razor.
	
I	bow	down	to	crocodile-headed	Sānt
ῑ
,
The	reddish	yellow	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	jewel	and	vase.
	
I	bow	down	to	scorpion-headed	Amṛtā,
The	reddish	yellow	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	jewel	and	lotus.
	
I	bow	down	to	hawk-headed	Saum
ῑ
,
The	whitish	yellow	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	jewel	and	vajra.
	
I	bow	down	to	fox-headed	Daṇḍ
ῑ
,
The	greenish	yellow	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	jewel	and	cudgel.
	
I	bow	down	to	tiger-headed	Rākṣas
ῑ
,
The	blackish	yellow	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	jewel	and	blood-filled	skull.
	
I	bow	down	to	vulture-headed	Bhakṣas
ῑ
,
The	greenish	red	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus	and	club.
I	bow	down	to	horse-headed	Rat
ῑ
,
The	red	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus	and	human	torso.

	
I	bow	down	to	garuḍa-headed	Rudhiramad
ῑ
,
The	pale	red	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus	and	cudgel.
	
I	bow	down	to	dog-headed	Ekacāriṇ
ῑ
,
The	red	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus	and	vajra.
	
I	bow	down	to	hoopoe-headed	Manohārikā,
The	red	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus	and	a	bow	and	arrow.
	
I	bow	down	to	deer-headed	Siddhikar
ῑ
,
The	greenish	red	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus	and	vase.
	
I	bow	down	to	wolf-headed	Vāyudev
ῑ
,
The	bluish	green	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	ensign.
	
I	bow	down	to	ibex-headed	Agnāy
ῑ
,
The	reddish	green	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	firebrand.
	
I	bow	down	to	sow-headed	Varāh
ῑ
,
The	blackish	green	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	noose	of	fangs.
	
I	bow	down	to	crow-headed	Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ
,
The	reddish	green	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	an	infant	corpse.
	
I	bow	down	to	elephant-headed	Bhujanā,
The	blackish	green	yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	bloated	corpse.
	
I	bow	down	to	snake-headed	Varuṇān
ῑ
,
The	[bluish]	green
22
	
yogin
ῑ
,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	noose	of	snakes.
	
I	bow	down	to	cuckoo-headed	Vajrā	[Mahākāl
ῑ
],
The	white	gatekeeper,	holding	a	vajra	and	iron	hook.
I	bow	down	to	goat-headed	Vajrā	[Mahāchāgalā],
The	yellow	gatekeeper,	holding	a	jewel	and	a	noose.

	
I	bow	down	to	lion-headed	Vajrā	[Mahākumbhakarṇ
ῑ
],
The	red	gatekeeper,	holding	a	lotus	and	an	iron	chain.
	
I	bow	down	to	snake-headed	Vajrā	[Lambodarā],
The	blackish	green	gatekeeper,	holding	a	crossed-vajra	and	a	bell.
	
While	reciting	this	prayer,	all	the	male	and	female	yogins	present	should	remove
their	outer	garments	and,	as	they	make	[successive]	full-length	prostrations,	they
should	respectfully	pay	homage	[to	the	deities].	While	respectfully	narrating	this
eulogy	in	a	melodious	voice	and	enacting	the	hundredfold	homage,	one	should
mentally	admit	and	feel	remorse	for	all	one’s	negativities	and	obscurations,
which	have	been,	are	being	and	will	be	accumulated.
This	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
	is	an	extraordinary
[method	for]	purifying	obscurations,	by	enacting	in	full	the	one	hundred	and	ten
homages
23
	to	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	Whatever	other	[confessional]
practices	one	may	[generally]	undertake,	such	as	the	
Reparation	and	Confession
of	the	Hells
,
24
	the	merits	accrued	by	one	who	practises	in	this	manner	are
immeasurable.	Therefore,	one	should	persevere	diligently	with	the	enactment	of
this	
Hundredfold	Homage
.
May	[the	influence	of	this]	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
through	 [Enactment	 of]	 the	 Hundredfold	 Homage	 to	 the	 Hundred	 Sacred
Enlightened	Families	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	not	be	exhausted	until
cyclic	existence	has	been	emptied.
This	most	profound	teaching	is	an	ancillary	chapter	of	the	
Liberation	by
Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	a	supporting	text	to	the	
Reparation	and
Confession	of	the	Hells
,	and	a	synopsis	of	the	three	editions	[long,	medium	and
short]	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities:	The	Ritual	Purification	[entitled
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Feelings].
	 It	 should	 be	 propagated	 everywhere	 and
enacted	energetically	at	all	times	without	interruption.

7
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
CONTEXT
In	addition	to	the	experiential	cultivation	of	the	nature	of	the	deity,	as
outlined	in	the	previous	two	chapters,	the	act	of	confession	plays	an
important	 role	 in	 purifying	 the	 negativity	 and	 obscuration	 that	 has,
according	 to	 the	 Buddhist	 perspective,	 clouded	 our	 minds	 over	 a
beginningless	cycle	of	lifetimes.
In	Buddhist	practice	this	process	of	purification,	which	includes	the
reparation	of	commitments	and	vows,	is	enhanced	by	the	engagement	of
the	‘four	antidotal	powers’.	In	the	context	of	this	cycle	of	teachings	the
four	powers	are:
1.	The	power	of	reliance,	which	here	refers	to	the	visualisation	of
the	hundred	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
2.	 The	 power	 of	 the	 actual	 antidote,	 which	 here	 refers	 to	 the
recitation	of	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
,
together	 with	 the	 practice	 of	 the	 Hundred-syllable	 Mantra	 of
Vajrasattva.
3.	 The	 power	 of	 remorse,	 which	 is	 the	 genuinely	 remorseful
recollection	of	all	negative	acts	previously	committed.
4.	 The	 power	 of	 resolve,	 which	 is	 the	 pledge	 never	 to	 engage
wilfully	in	such	negative	actions	again.
Before	beginning	the	confessional	practice,	it	is	recommended	that	the
practitioner	should	make	actual	or	mentally	emanated	offerings	before
his	or	her	altar.	Then,	each	afternoon,	while	sitting	on	the	floor	in	front	of
the	altar,	the	practitioner	should	engage	in	this	practice,	with	the	palms	of
the	 hands	 placed	 together,	 chanting	 the	 words	 lucidly	 and	 with
conviction.	 For	 as	 long	 as	 practitioners	 have	 not	 gained	 full
accomplishment	in	the	practices	of	this	cycle	of	teachings,	inappropriate
negative	 actions	 of	 body,	 speech	 and	 mind	 should	 be	 continuously

confessed.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession,	in	the
Presence	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,
1
	an	extract	from	the	
Peace	ful
and	 Wrath	 ful	 Deities:	 A	 Pro	 found	 Sacred	 Teaching,	 [entitled]	 Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra,	Mahottara,
And	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities!
May	the	degenerations	[of	our	commitments]	be	purified!
	
In	order	that	the	degenerations	[of	our	commitments]	may	be	naturally	purified,
without	being	renounced,	the	[following]	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of
Confession,	in	the	Presence	of	the	Peace	ful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities
,	which	is	an
extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
,	is	[now]	presented.	Be	persevering	in
this	regard,	O	Children	of	Posterity!	SAMAYA!
	
This	[confessional	practice]	is	presented	in	six	parts,	namely:	confession	[in	the
presence]	of	the	inexpressible	truth,	confession	in	the	presence	of	the	Peaceful
Deities,	 confession	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 Wrathful	 Deities,	 the	 plaintive
confession	of	rampant	egohood,	confession	in	the	presence	of	the	view,	and
confession	[in	the	presence]	of	all	Those	Gone	to	Bliss.
PRELIMINARIES
The	invitation	and	request	for	[the	confessional	field]	to	be	present
	
OṂO,	supreme	buddha-body	of	pristine	cognition,
Even	though,	like	the	[clarity	of	the]	waxing	moon,
You	are	free	from	conceptual	elaboration	in	this	natural	maṇḍala,
Your	compassion	[radiates	to	all]	without	bias,	like	the	rays	of	the	sun.
Please	be	present	here,	and	attend	to	us!
	
The	homage	to	the	three	buddha-bodies,	which	compose	the	Peace	ful	and

Wrathful	Deities
	
I	bow	down	to	the	three	buddha-bodies	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:
To	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Reality,	 the	 inexpressible	 and	 unwavering
discriminative	awareness,
To	the	supremely	blissful	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	the	lords	of	the
five	enlightened	families,
And	to	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation:	extensive,	compassionate	and	skilful.
	
The	three	fold	of	fering	of	[outer]	phenomena,	[inner]	cloud-masses,	and	secret
[substances]
	
By	arraying	the	vast	and	pure	expanse	of	space,
With	[billowing]	clouds	of	unsurpassed	Samantabhadra-like	offerings,
Whether	they	be	actually	gathered	together	or	imagined,
We	dedicate	[to	you]	oceans	of	outer,	inner	and	secret	offerings.
3
	
The	secret	of	fering	of	supreme	bliss
	
May	[the	deities]	be	delighted	by	the	non-dual	‘generative	essence’
4
Whose	[blissful]	single	savour	indicates	a	[pristine]	state,
Where	all	the	infinite	maṇḍalas	of	the	conquerors,	without	exception,
Are	established,	beyond	conjunction	or	disjunction,
In	the	secret	womb	of	Samantabhadr
ῑ.
	
The	affirmation	of	vows	within	the	modality	of	the	view
	
Since	the	nature	of	mind	is	the	great	expanse	of	reality,
And	all	things	are	pure	atemporal	inner	radiance,
This	yoga	is	itself	the	inexpressible	and	inconceivable	expanse.
Everlastingly	we	bow	down	to	the	mind	of	enlightenment,
Which	is	[the	realisation	of]	sameness!
	
The	call	to	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	for	attention
	

ĀḤ	 In	 the	 atemporal	 omnipresence	 of	 the	 Great	 Perfection,	 which	 is
Samantabhadra,
Is	[displayed]	the	maṇḍala	of	the	outer,	inner,	and	secret	arrays.
Here,	 the	 expanse	 of	 male	 and	 female	 deities	 is	 the	 [natural]	 purity	 of
mundane	existence,
And	the	spontaneously	perfect	male	and	female	consorts	are	the	[natural
purity]	of	past	and	future	[events].
All	 of	 these	 are	 centred	 in	 the	 ‘lotus	 of	 vast	 space’,	 which	 is	 that	 of
[Samantabhadr
ῑ
],
She	who	embodies	the	most	secret	and	most	joyous	of	supreme	forms.
Within	this	[space,	the	maṇḍala]	radiates	as	a	supreme	non-dual	seminal	point,
And	within	this	secret	maṇḍala,	where	there	is	no	conjunction	or	disjunction,
Is	[arrayed]	the	buddha-body	of	the	uncontrived	nucleus	of	enlightenment,
free	from	conceptual	elaboration,
Where	the	immutable	deities	of	supreme	bliss	manifest	in	myriad	forms.
O,	 you	 manifold	 assembly	 of	 [peaceful]	 emanations,	 present	 within	 the
indivisible	expanse,
Including	the	male	and	female	[buddhas]	of	the	five	enlightened	families,	who
are	the	Great	Embodiment,
The	[sixteen]	male	and	female	bodhisattvas,	and	the	six	sages	who	instruct
living	beings,
Along	with	the	eight	emanational	gatekeepers,	male	and	female;
O,	you	manifold	[wrathful]	assembly	of	the	emanational	deities	of	pristine
cognition,
[Including]	the	ten	male	and	female	wrathful	conquerors,
Great	and	glorious	[principals]	of	the	five	enlightened	families,
Who	preside	over	the	indestructible	matrix	of	female	[wrathful]	deities,
The	[sixteen	active]	seals	[who	represent	the	natural	transformation]
Of	the	classes	of	consciousness	and	their	objects,
And	the	four	gatekeepers;
O,	you	twenty-eight	outer	and	inner	ḍākin
ῑ
s	and	yogin
ῑ
s,
Who,	with	motherly	loving	kindness	and	sisterly	affection,
Evaluate	our	good	and	bad	[conduct],
And	inspect	our	commitments;
And	you	oath-bound	[protectors]	of	indestructible	reality,	who	have	been
subjugated	—
Please,	[all	of	you],	attend	to	us!

CONFESSION	[IN	THE	PRESENCE]	OF	THE
INEXPRESSIBLE	TRUTH
HŪṂ	We	[aspiring]	awareness	holders,	who	are	heirs	to	the	compassionate
lineage,
Strive	to	cultivate	the	mind	of	enlightenment	for	the	sake	of	all	living	beings.
In	order	that	the	unsurpassed	state	may	be	attained,
We	have	repeatedly	received	and	earnestly	undertaken
[Both]	the	individual	disciplines	of	the	ocean-like	teachings,
5
And	 the	 supreme	 vows	 concordant	 with	 buddha-body,	 speech	 and	 mind,
including:
The	[appropriate]	commitments	of	[the	Vehicle	of]	Indestructible	Reality,
Which	are	dangerous	to	transgress,	and	must	be	constantly	maintained,
Together	with	all	the	general	and	particular	higher	commitments.
Yet,	 even	 though	 we	 strive	 neither	 to	 abandon	 nor	 to	 transgress	 [these
commitments],
And	we	strive	neither	to	deviate	from	the	truth	nor	to	allow	our	minds	to
fluctuate,
Since	 we	 idly	 think	 that	 we	 have	 the	 momentary	 luxury	 to	 sit	 back	 in
relaxation,
We	have	not	reached	fulfilment	and	our	mental	energy	has	been	faltering.
We	have	lacked	alertness,	and	have	been	overpowered	by	carelessness.
If,	therefore,	under	the	sway	of	ignorance,	consciously	or	unconsciously,
Our	meditation	has	lacked	perseverance,
And	we	have	been	distracted	in	our	ritual	service	and	means	for	attainment,
We	will	have	contradicted	the	injunctions	of	the	Teacher	and	contradicted	our
vows.
Further,	it	says	in	the	[Buddha’s]	scriptures:
‘A	 yogin	 should	 not	 associate,	 even	 for	 a	 moment,	 with	 one	 whose
commitments	have	degenerated.’
Not	being	[continuously]	cognisant	of	this,	we	have	transgressed	the	secret
approach	[of	the	tantras],
And	[consistently]	we	have	had	difficulty	discriminating	[between	worthy	and
unworthy	associates].
Lacking	supernormal	prescience,	we	have	failed	to	recognise	those	that	are
unworthy.

Thus,	now,	with	heartfelt	remorse,	we	confess	all	our	individual	faults,
Which	have	already	become	the	misfortunes	of	this	life	and	will	become	the
obscurations	of	future	lives.
Whatever	faults	of	degeneration	and	obscuration	have	tainted	us,
Whether	they	be	our	own	actual	degenerations	or	those	acquired	through
association	with	others	by:
Mixing	in	assemblies	with	those	whose	[commitments]	have	degenerated,
Repairing	[the	commitments	of]	those	who	have	degenerated,
Giving	the	[sacred]	teachings	to	those	who	are	degenerate	and	unworthy,
Or	by	committing	the	degenerate	fault	of	not	avoiding	[the	influence	of]	those
who	have	degenerated,	and	so	forth,
Do	not	permit	the	retribution	of	the	sublime	[protectors]	to	fall	upon	us!
Attend	to	us	with	the	compassion	of	your	loving	kindness!
And	make	us	secure,	so	that	we	never	stray	from	the	non-dual	expanse.
Having	inspired	us	to	abide	within	the	modality	of	non-referential	equanimity,
Please	grant	us	the	purity	of	the	non-dual	truth!
	
In	ultimate	truth,	inexpressible	and	without	conceptual	elaboration,
There	is	no	objective	referent	to	any	conceptual	thought	whatsoever.
But	if,	by	the	power	of	illusion-like	relative	appearances,	we	should	err,
[We	acknowledge	this	and	seek	your	forgiveness.]
We	confess	that	we	have	deviated	from	the	buddha-mind!
If	we	have	committed	transgressions,	please	forgive	our	deviations.
	
Throughout	beginningless	time	and	throughout	the	limits	of	cyclic	existence,
We	have	roamed	within	these	turning	worlds	driven	on	by	the	forces	of
[ripening]	past	actions	—
[Endlessly]	drinking	the	poisons	of	dissonant	states	and	false	perspectives	on
reality.
May	The	One	Gone	to	Bliss,	king	among	compassionate	physicians,
Grant	the	medicine	of	liberation,	the	nectar	of	the	genuine	teachings,
To	those	[of	us]	who	are	severely	afflicted	by	the	[primal]	disease,	which	is
suffering!
May	all	the	diseases	caused	by	bewildering	dissonant	states	be	pacified!
May	we	be	sustained	in	the	nucleus	of	unsurpassed	enlightenment!
We	take	refuge	in	you,	O	compassionate	lord	of	loving	kindness!
We	confess	that	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind!

	
If	we	have	boasted	of	our	high	view	and	yet	not	understood	the	meaning	of
actual	reality,
If	 we	 have	 not	 clearly	 visualised	 the	 meditational	 deity,	 owing	 to	 our
meditations	being	excessively	brief,
Or	if	we	have	made	an	inadequate	number	of	recitations	or	spoken	these
defectively,
However	 we	 have	 deviated	 from	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 oceans	 of
conquerors,
We	confess	our	transgressions	in	the	presence	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Conquerors.
We	make	confession	to	you,	O	Compassionate	Ones!
We	make	confession	in	the	presence	of	the	entire	assembly	of	the	deities	of
pristine	cognition!
	
If	we	have	failed	to	please	our	spiritual	teacher,	on	account	of	the	feebleness
of	our	effort,
If	we	have	failed	to	be	well	regarded	by	our	spiritual	brothers	and	sisters,	on
account	of	the	feebleness	of	our	devotion,
If	we	have	divulged	the	oral	teachings	to	another,	on	account	of	our	flirtatious
intentions,
Indeed,	whatever	extravagances,	omissions,	deviations	or	mistakes	we	have
made,
With	respect	to	the	fundamental	commitments	of	buddha-body,	speech	and
mind,
Whilst	 swayed	 by	 the	 influence	 of	 ignorance,	 either	 consciously	 or
unconsciously,
We	 confess	 all	 such	 transgressions	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 Peaceful	 and
Wrathful	Conquerors.
We	make	confession	to	you,	O	Compassionate	Ones!
We	make	confession	to	the	oceanic	assembly	of	the	conquerors!
May	all	[the	degenerations]	that	we	now	confess	be	cleansed	and	purified!
Please	grant	us	the	purity	of	the	non-dual	truth!
SAMAYA!
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	PEACEFUL

DEITIES,	THE	EMBODIMENT	OF	[THE	QUIESCENT
NATURE	OF]	REALITY
The	initial	confession	is	that	to	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	father
and	mother	consorts
HŪṂ	We	pray	to	you,	father	and	mother,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
Mind	and	phenomena	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	father	and	mother,	in	union,
Due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind
Of	you,	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	father	and	mother,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Second	is	the	confession	to	the	five	male	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families	of
the	conquerors
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	five	[male	buddhas]	of	the	enlightened	families	of	the
conquerors,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	five	psycho-physical	aggregates	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O	five	[male	buddhas]	of	the	enlightened	families	of	the	conquerors,
Due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind
Of	the	five	[male	buddhas	of	the]	enlightened	families	of	the	conquerors,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Third	is	the	confession	to	the	five	female	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	five	female	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families,	listen	and
attend	to	us!
The	five	elements	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O,	five	female	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families,
Due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind

Of	the	five	female	buddhas	of	the	enlightened	families,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Fourth	is	the	confession	to	the	eight	male	bodhisattvas	of	the	retinue
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	eight	male	bodhisattvas,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	eight	classes	of	consciousness	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O,	eight	male	bodhisattvas,	due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this
to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	eight	male
bodhisattvas,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Fifth	is	the	confession	to	the	eight	female	bodhisattvas
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	eight	female	bodhisattvas,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	eight	objects	of	consciousness	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O,	eight	female	bodhisattvas,	due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood
this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	eight	female
bodhisattvas,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Sixth	is	the	confession	to	the	six	sages
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	six	sages,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	six	dissonant	mental	states	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O,	six	sages,	due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this	to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	six	sages,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Seventh	is	the	confession	to	the	four	male	gatekeepers
	

We	pray	to	you,	the	four	male	gatekeepers,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	four	immeasurable	[aspirations]	are	atemporally	manifest	buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O,	four	male	gatekeepers,	due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this
to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	four	male
gatekeepers,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Eighth	is	the	con	fession	to	the	four	female	gatekeepers
	
We	pray	to	you,	the	four	female	gatekeepers,	listen	and	attend	to	us!
The	 four	 extremes	 of	 eternalism	 and	 nihilism	 are	 atemporally	 manifest
buddhas,
But	even	though	this	[reality]	is	the	expression	of	your	enlightened	intention,
O,	four	female	gatekeepers,	due	to	our	ignorance,	we	have	not	understood	this
to	be	so.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	four	female
gatekeepers,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Then	the	con	fession	should	be	made	to	the	[entire	array	o	f	the]	peace	ful
deities	in	the	following	way:
	
OṂ	 Since	 our	 minds	 are	 not	 endowed	 with	 pristine	 cognition,	 which	 is
intrinsic	awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	psycho-physical	aggregates,	the	sensory
spectra,	and	their	activity	fields,
Within	the	maṇḍala	of	the	peaceful	deities.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	each	of	you,	the	forty-two	peaceful	deities!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	five	psycho-physical	aggregates	with	the
five	[male	buddhas]	of	the	enlightened	families,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be

afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	assembly	of	Samantabhadra!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	 have	 not	 correctly	 integrated	 the	 five	 elements	 with	 the	 five	 female
buddhas,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	assembly	of	Samantabhadr
ῑ
!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	four	classes	of	
consciousness	and	four
sense	organs	with	the	[eight]	male	bodhisattvas,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	assembly	of	male	bodhisattvas!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	four	objects	of	consciousness	and	four
times	with	the	[eight]	female	bodhisattvas,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	assembly	of	female	bodhisattvas!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	six	dissonant	mental	states	with	the	[six]
sages,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	emanational	buddha-bodies,	the	six	sages!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic

awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	four	immeasurable	[aspirations]	with	the
[four]	male	gatekeepers,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	wrathful	male	gatekeepers!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	the	eternalist	and	nihilist	[perspectives	on]
awareness	with	the	[four]	female	gatekeepers,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	the	wrathful	female	gatekeepers!
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	not	correctly	integrated	mind	and	phenomena	with	Samantabhadra
and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	father	and	mother,
And	further	still,	our	own	minds,	swayed	by	ignorance,	have	continued	to	be
afflicted	by	egotism.
We	seek	the	forgiveness	of	you,	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
!
	
Since	our	minds	are	not	endowed	with	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic
awareness,
We	have	been	afflicted	by	bewildering	ignorance,
And	have	been	alienated	from	the	meditational	deities
By	the	force	of	dissonant	mental	states	and	past	[negative]	actions.
Swayed	by	self-deception,	we	have	disappointed	our	teachers,
Stirred	by	strong	pride,	we	have	agitated	our	spiritual	brothers	and	sisters,
Distracted	by	vanity,
6
	we	have	divulged	the	secret	mantras,
Gripped	by	miserliness,	we	have	been	untimely	in	the	dedication	of	offerings,
Entrapped	by	base	friendships,	we	have	violated	the	secret	[precepts]	of	the
rituals,
Weakened	by	feeble	yogic	discipline,	we	have	failed	to	eradicate	obstructing
forces.
Thus,	 [our	 commitments]	 have	 degenerated	 due	 to	 either	 excessive	 or

deficient	determination	and	strength.
	
Throughout	our	lives,	from	beginningless	time	until	the	present	[life],
In	which	we	have	assumed	this	body,
However	much	negativity	and	non-virtuous	past	actions	we	have	accrued,
We	seek	your	forgiveness	for	all	these	transgressions.
	
O	you	whose	cognisance	and	knowledge	spans	[the	three]	times,
Since	you	are	sublime	beings,	embrace	us!
Since	we	are	sentient	beings,	we	are	flawed	and	bewildered,
And,	since	[this	separation]	is	an	illusion,	may	our	confession	be	granted!
Since	you	are	accomplished	in	skilful	means,	bestow	your	purity	upon	us!
	
Then	a	remorseful	confession	should	be	made	to	the	peaceful	deities	as	follows:
	
OṂ	Most	precious	Samantabhadra	[in	union],	supreme	buddha-mind,
Even	though	you	are	our	father	and	hold	mastery	over	the	three	world-
systems,
And	even	though	you	are	our	mother	and	assimilate	[all	things]	in	the	ultimate
expanse,
By	conceiving	of	our	bodies	[in	a	mundane	way],	we	have	dishonoured	the
illusory	body.
Thus	 our	 commitments	 have	 degenerated	 and	 we	 have	 grown	 truly
remorseful.
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	mother	and
father!
	
Most	precious	buddhas	of	the	five	enlightened	families,	[manifestations	of]
supreme	buddha-mind,
Even	though	you	are	our	fathers	and	hold	mastery	over	the	three	world-
systems,
And	even	 though	 you	are	 our	 mothers	and	 assimilate	[all	 things]	 in	 the
ultimate	expanse,
By	conceiving	of	our	bodies	[in	a	mundane	way],	we	have	dishonoured	the
illusory	body.
Thus	 our	 commitments	 have	 degenerated	 and	 we	 have	 grown	 truly

remorseful.
We	 seek	 your	 forgiveness,	 O	 father	 and	 mother	 buddhas	 of	 the	 five
enlightened	families!
	
Most	precious	male	and	female	bodhisattvas,	[manifestations	of]	supreme
buddha-mind,
Even	though	you	are	our	fathers	and	hold	mastery	over	the	three	world-
systems,
And	even	 though	 you	are	 our	 mothers	and	 assimilate	[all	 things]	 in	 the
ultimate	expanse,
By	conceiving	of	our	bodies	[in	a	mundane	way],	we	have	dishonoured	the
illusory	body.
Thus	 our	 commitments	 have	 degenerated	 and	 we	 have	 grown	 truly
remorseful.
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	male	and	female	bodhisattvas!
	
Most	precious	six	sages,	buddha-bodies	of	emanation,	[and	manifestations	of]
supreme	buddha-mind,
Even	though	you	hold	mastery	over	all	the	sentient	beings	throughout	the
three	world-systems,
And	even	though	you	emancipate	their	respective	worlds	into	the	ultimate
expanse,
By	conceiving	of	our	bodies	[in	a	mundane	way],	we	have	dishonoured	the
illusory	body.
Thus	 our	 commitments	 have	 degenerated	 and	 we	 have	 grown	 truly
remorseful.
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	six	sages,	emanational	buddha-bodies!
	
Most	 precious	 male	 and	 female	 gatekeepers,	 [manifestations	 of]	 supreme
buddha-mind,
Even	though	you	are	our	fathers	and	hold	mastery	over	the	three	world-
systems,
And	even	 though	 you	are	 our	 mothers	and	 assimilate	[all	 things]	 in	 the
ultimate	expanse,
By	conceiving	of	our	bodies	[in	a	mundane	way],	we	have	dishonoured	the
illusory	body.
Thus	 our	 commitments	 have	 degenerated	 and	 we	 have	 grown	 truly

remorseful.
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	male	and	female	gatekeepers!
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	WRATHFUL
DEITIES
The	confession	of	faults	in	achieving	meditative	stability	in	reality	is	as	follows:
OṂ	As	we	have	failed	to	liberate	the	egotism	of	the	subject-object	dichotomy,
Within	the	original	maṇḍala	of	natural	sameness,
We	still	have	not	realised	the	non-dual	truth	of	the	abiding	nature.
O	non-dual	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	we	seek	forgiveness!
7
	
The	confession	of	faults	in	achieving	the	meditative	stability	which	illuminates
all	that	appears	is	as	follows:
	
You	open	the	portals	which	unimpededly	illuminate	the	ultimate	truth,
And	[naturally]	arise	as	the	Buddha-body	[of	Perfect	Resource],	within	an
expanse	of	radiantly	clear	moonlight,
But	 we	 have	 let	 the	 light	 [emanating	 from]	 the	 seminal	 points	 of	 your
‘generative	essence’	be	diffused.
O	Buddha-body	[of	Perfect	Resource],	which	illuminates	all	that	appears,	we
seek	forgiveness!
8
	
The	confession	[of	faults	in	achieving]	the	meditative	stability	of	the	causal	basis
[entailing	the	visualisation	of]	the	tiered	celestial	palace	and	the	seats	[of	the
wrathful	deities]	is	as	follows:
	
From	the	expanse	of	space,	which	is	the	unborn	ultimate	truth,
There	appears	the	buddha-body,	the	medium	through	which	the	fruitional
attributes	[of	buddhahood]	emerge.
Yet	we	have	not	even	clearly	visualised	this	powerful	celestial	palace,
The	 abode	 in	 which	 the	 supreme	 power	 [of	 buddha-body]	 is	 gradually
generated.
In	the	presence	of	the	blazing	celestial	palace,	we	seek	forgiveness!

	
Confession	to	the	five	male	herukas,	the	executors	of	buddha-body
	
Though	you	steadfastly	[appear]	as	buddha-bodies,	sealed	within	the	nature	of
supreme	bliss,
Holding	in	your	hands	the	respective	implements,	emblematic	of	the	six
pristine	cognitions,
We	 have	 not	 [even]	 achieved	 the	 experience	 of	 such	 [vividly]	 clear
visualisation.
O	five	blood-drinking	herukas,	we	seek	forgiveness!
	
Confession	to	their	consorts,	the	five	krodheśvar
ῑ
	
O	supreme	mother-consorts,	conjoined	indivisibly	with	the	[male]	buddha-
bodies,
We	have	let	the	light	of	your	non-dual	‘generative	essence’	be	diffused,
Into	the	‘spacious	expanse’,	which	is	the	lotus	seed	of	desire.
O	five	krodheśvar
ῑ
	deities,	we	seek	forgiveness!
	
Confession	to	the	eight	mātaraḥ
	
O	wrathful	female	deities	of	pristine	cognition,	born	of	buddha-mind,
[The	natural	transformation]	of	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness,
O	Gaur
ῑ
	and	accompanying	[Mātaraḥ],	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	pristine	cognition,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	your	buddha-mind,
O	 eight	 mātaraḥ	 [who	 embody]	 the	 classes	 [of	 consciousness],	 we	 seek
forgiveness!
	
Confession	to	the	eight	piśāc
ῑ
	
O	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
	and	accompanying	[piśāc
ῑ
],
Though	you	remain	unwavering	in	a	compassionate	and	quiescent	state,
You	emanate	in	blazing	awesome	forms,	[endowed]	with	fangs	and	wings,
9
To	pacify	misconceptions	and	substantialist	views.
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	your	buddha-mind,
O	 eight	 piśāc
ῑ
	 [who	 embody]	 the	 objects	 [of	 consciousness],	 we	 seek

forgiveness!
	
Confession	to	the	four	female	gatekeepers
	
O	four	female	gatekeepers,	at	[the	portals	of]	the	ornate	palatial	maṇḍala,
You	who	summon	[with	the	hook],	bind	[with	the	noose],	shackle	[with	the
chain]	and	insulate	[with	the	bell],
O	Horse-headed	Aṅkuśā	and	accompanying	[female	gatekeepers],
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	your	buddha-mind,
O	seals	of	the	four	gatekeepers,	we	seek	forgiveness!
	
Confession	to	the	twenty-eight	
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	
O	Iśvar
ῑ
,	you	who	are	accomplished	in	the	rites	of	‘liberation’,
10
And	hold	mastery	over	[the	judgement	of]	virtuous	and	non-virtuous	actions,
O	Iśvar
ῑ
,	assembly	of	mothers,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	your	buddha-mind,
O	oceanic	expanse	of	mothers	and	sisters,	we	seek	forgiveness!
	
Confession	to	the	awareness	holders
	
[O	awareness	holders],	though	you	never	stray	from	a	state	of	compassionate
equipoise,
Within	the	maṇḍala	of	spontaneously	present	natural	expression,
We	have	not	achieved	your	[pristine]	clarity	of	subtle	meditative	stability.
O	you	who	maintain	the	enlightened	attributes,	we	seek	your	forgiveness!
	
Confession	of	one’s	beginningless	violation	of	the	commitments
	
Throughout	the	beginningless	succession	of	our	births,
Until	now,	when	we	have	assumed	these,	our	present	bodies,
We	have	revolved	within	the	worlds	of	rebirth,	swayed	by	ignorance,
And	however	many	human	births	we	have	taken,
Wherever	we	have	been	born,	we	have	engaged	in	all	kinds	of	negative	acts,
Including	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	and	the	five	approximate	crimes	—
Actually	committing	them,	or	inciting	[others]	to	commit	them,

And	even	rejoicing	in	committing	and	inciting	them.
Please	direct	your	enlightened	compassion	towards	us!
Grant	us	purification,	and	bestow	your	[spiritual]	accomplishments	upon	us!
	
Then	the	confession	should	be	recited	to	the	entire	maṇḍala	of	wrathful	deities,
and	the	request	for	forgiveness	made	in	the	following	way:
	
HŪṂ	O	herukas	of	pristine	cognition,	natural	purity	of	the	five	poisons,
[Resplendent]	amidst	flames	blazing	like	the	fire	at	the	end	of	an	aeon,
United	with	the	five	krodh
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
,	the	great	mothers	of	space;
O	four	inner	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	Gaur
ῑ
	and	your	partners,
O	outer	yogin
ῑ
s,	Pukkās
ῑ
	and	your	partners,
O	fanged	clusters	of	devourers,	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
	and	your	partners,
O	winged	[clusters]	of	the	intermediate	directions,	Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
	and	your
partners,
O	twenty-eight	
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
,	of	the	blazing	courtyard,
O	four	female	gatekeepers,	who	summon,	bind,	shackle	and	insulate
11
	at	the
four	gates:
We	who	 have	 not	even	 clearly	 visualised	the	 bodies	of	 the	 assembly	 of
wrathful	herukas,
We	who	have	failed	to	recite	sufficient	heart-mantras,
And	failed	to	stabilise	[the	actualisation	of]	the	seals,
We	who	have	failed	to	offer	adequate	feast-and	torma-offerings,
Request	the	entire	assembly	of	wrathful	deities	for	forgiveness!
	
Next,	the	following	specific	confessional	prayers	should	be	made	to	the	maṇḍala
of	the	wrathful	deities:
	
OṂ	Should	we	have	broken	our	pledge,	which	is	dangerous	to	transgress,
Having	earlier	taken	upon	us	this	supremely	secret	vow,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	five	families
of	herukas,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Should	we	have	been	obscured	by	conceptual	grasping,
Whilst	engaged	in	the	practices	of	the	supreme	sexual	yoga,

For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	great	mother
Krodh
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
s,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	[mother]	krodheśvar
ῑ
s!
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	actualise	the	sacred	substances	and	the	seals,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	carnivorous
Gaur
ῑ
s,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	eight	mātaraḥ,	embodiments	of	the	classes	[of
consciousness]!
	
Should	 we	 have	 failed	 to	 array	 the	 offerings	 of	 flesh	 and	 blood,
12
	 in
accordance	with	the	textual	descriptions,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	Piśāc
ῑ
s,
Siṃhamukh
ῑ
	and	her	partners,
We	 seek	 your	 forgiveness,	 O	 ḍākin
ῑ
s,	 embodiments	 of	 the	 objects	 [of
consciousness]!
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	differentiate	between	the	four	gates:	east,	south,
west,	and	north,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	female
gatekeepers,	the	horse-headed	Aṅkuśā	and	her	partners,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	four	female	gatekeepers	of	pristine	cognition!
Should	we	have	failed	to	subdue	[attachment	to]	the	six	realms	of	cyclic
existence,
Having	accepted	[vows],	which	are	dangerous	to	transgress,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 seven
mothers	and	four	sisters,
13
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	eleven	ḍākin
ῑ
s!
	
Should	we	have	allowed	our	resources	to	become	exhausted	and	the	first	fruits
of	the	feast-offerings	to	be	spoiled,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	Iśvar
ῑ
	who
monitor	the	first	fruits	[of	the	feast-offerings],
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	twenty-eight	
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
!
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	remain	unmovingly	in	the	sacred	abodes,	but	instead

engaged	in	[distracted]	activities,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	wardens	of
the	sacred	abodes,
14
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	great	wardens	of	the	sacred	abodes!
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	regard	our	personal	[spiritual	teacher]	as	our	parent,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	vajra-master,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	regal	vajra[-master]!
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	master	meditative	stability,
And	failed	to	distinguish	[the	characteristics	of]	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	assistant
vajra-master,
15
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	lamp	of	the	Buddhist	teachings!
16
	
Should	 we	 have	 interrupted	 [the	 stabilisation	 of]	 the	 seals	 through	 our
laziness,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 ritual
officiant,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	master	of	ritual	activities!
Should	we	have	failed	to	reach	the	highest	criteria	when	engaged	in	the
practices	of	sexual	yoga,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	female
consorts,	the	embodiments	of	discriminative	awareness,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	secret	mother,	consort	who	embodies	awareness!
	
Should	 we	 have	 lacked	 the	 power	 to	 maintain	 meditative	 stability	 when
engaging	in	rites	of	‘liberation’,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the	 male
‘liberating’	avengers,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	[Citipati],	master	of	‘liberating’	avengers!
17
	
Should	we	have	failed	to	please	the	buddha-mind	of	the	wrathful	female
emanations,

For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 the
[gatekeeping]	messengers	who	summon	and	guide,
18
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	[female	gatekeepers],	who	swiftly	enact	the	rites!
	
Should	 we	 have	 broken	 the	 continuous	 expression	 of	 love	 and	 affection
through	our	laziness,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	our	brothers	and
sisters,	[our	companions]	on	the	path	to	enlightenment,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	vajra-brothers	and	sisters!
	
Should	we	have	allowed	our	commitments	to	degenerate	out	of	trivial	banter,
For	 whatever	 ways	 we	 have	 contradicted	 the	 buddha-mind	 of	 those
[protectors]	who	determine	the	outer	and	inner	[boundaries	of	our	precepts],
We	 seek	 your	 forgiveness,	 O	 you	 [protectors]	 who	 keep	 vigil	 over	 the
commitments!
	
Should	we	have	consumed	our	resources	[accumulated	for	the	feast-offering],
And	allowed	the	first	fruits	of	the	residual	offering	to	be	spoiled,
For	whatever	ways	we	have	contradicted	the	buddha-mind	of	the	subterranean
goddesses	within	the	outer	retinue,
We	seek	your	forgiveness,	O	greatly	compassionate	ones!
	
Please	be	patient	[with	us],
And	bestow	your	pure	spiritual	accomplishments	upon	us!
PLAINTIVE	CONFESSION	OF	RAMPANT	EGOHOOD
19
OṂO	great	compassionate	and	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva,
Whose	supremely	exquisite	form,	immaculate	and	white,
Is	suffused	by	a	pure	inner	radiance,	glowing	like	a	hundred	thousand	suns
and	moons,
[Emanating]	heroic	rays	of	light,	which	illuminate	the	chiliocosm,
You	who	are	known	as	the	guide	and	teacher	of	the	three	levels	of	existence,
The	unique	friend	to	all	living	beings	of	the	three	world-systems,
O	lord	of	loving	kindness,	deity	of	compassion,	please	attend	to	us!

	
From	 beginningless	 time,	 without	 end,	 I	 have	 roamed	 throughout	 cyclic
existence	—
Led	astray	by	the	momentum	of	my	mistaken	past	actions	and	improper	past
behaviour,
I	have	mistaken	the	path	and	become	lost	on	the	path.
I	regret	with	powerful	remorse	the	negative	past	actions	I	have	committed,	of
any	kind.
Drawn	by	the	momentum	of	momentary	yet	violently	resonant	past	acts,
I	have	sunk	into	this	ocean	of	suffering,	the	sea	of	cyclic	existence.
The	fires	of	blazing	hatred	have	unabatingly	seared	my	mind,
The	dense	darkness	of	delusion	has	blinded	my	discriminative	awareness,
The	ocean	coasts	of	desire	have	drowned	my	consciousness,
The	mountain	of	fierce	pride	has	entombed	me	in	the	lower	existences,
The	cruel	whirlwind	of	envy	has	sucked
20
	me	into	these	turning	worlds,
Where,	entwined	by	the	tight	knot	of	egocentricity,
I	have	fallen	into	the	pit	of	desire,	this	chasm	of	blazing	fires.
Unbearably	brutal	misery	has	poured	down	on	me	like	heavy	rain.
[Damaged]	by	such	extreme	and	unbearable	suffering,
[Seared]	by	the	blazing	ferocious	fires	of	my	negative	past	actions,
The	shoots	of	my	consciousness	and	sense	faculties	have	been	blunted.
If	my	body,	this	illusory	aggregate,	can	no	longer	withstand	[all	this	pain],
How	 can	 you	 bear	 [to	 witness]	 this,	 O	 Compassionate	 Lord	 of	 Loving
Kindness?
21
	
Obscured	fool	[that	I	am,	burdened	by]	the	most	negative,	evil	past	acts,
Propelled	by	the	momentum	of	these	past	actions,
I	have	taken	birth	as	the	personification	of	rampant	egohood	within	this
world-system	of	desire.
I	regret	having	taken	such	birth,	and	am	dismayed	by	my	past	acts!
Yet,	regardless	of	my	regret	and	my	dismay,	past	actions	cannot	be	re-made.
The	momentum	of	past	actions	is	as	strong	as	a	river’s	inexorable	flow,
So	how	can	the	mighty	river	of	past	actions	be	reversed	in	a	mere	moment!
All	that	ripens	is	born	from	one’s	own	past	actions,
And	I	am	one	who	has	been	swept	along	by	the	violent	whirlwind	of	my	past
actions,

And	accordingly	have	roamed	over	countless	past	aeons,
Lost	within	the	dark	prisons	of	cyclic	existence.
O	Lord	of	Loving	Kindness,	through	the	blessing	of	your	compassion,
Purify	the	obscurations	[generated	by]	my	past	actions	and	dissonant	mental
states,
And	secure	me	in	the	presence	of	your	mother-like	loving	kindness!
	
Here	am	I,	continuously	yearning	for	the	sight	of	your	compassionate	face,
Which	shines	with	a	luminosity	like	that	of	the	sun,
And	radiates	with	a	clarity	like	that	of	the	moon.
Yet	my	darkened	eyes,	blinded	by	the	cataracts
22
	of	beginningless	ignorance,
Are	unable	to	see	you,
O	Lord	of	Living	Beings,	where	are	you	[now]?
	
When	I	am	terrified	by	the	utterly	unbearable	and	virulent	power	of	past
actions,
And	my	hair	stands	on	end,	out	of	fear,
I	call	out	this	lament,	in	heartfelt	passion,
And	cry	out	[to	you]	in	a	voice	of	utter	despair!
O	Lord	of	Loving	Kindness,	if	you	do	not	attend	[to	me]	with	compassion
now,
At	the	time	of	my	death,	when	my	mind	and	body	separate,
When	I	am	cut	off	from	the	company	of	spiritual	friends,	and	dragged	away
by	Yama,
At	that	time,	when	my	relatives	stay	behind	in	the	world,
Yet	I	alone	am	led	away	by	the	power	of	past	actions,
At	that	time,	I	will	be	unprotected	and	without	a	refuge.
So,	do	not	on	any	account	hesitate	or	delay	now,
But	draw	near	to	me	at	this	very	moment,
And	enact	the	wrathful	rites	of	‘liberation’.
	
Beings	such	as	I,	who	are	afflicted	by	past	actions,
Have	been	subject	to	misconceptions	since	beginningless	time.
As	a	result,	we	have	not	achieved	release	from	the	[turning]	states	of	cyclic
existence.
Indeed,	beings	such	as	I	have	assumed	such	a	countless	number	of	corporeal

forms,
During	countless	births	in	countless	aeons,
That	if	our	flesh	and	bones	were	to	be	collected	together,
Their	accumulated	mass	would	fill	this	world,
And	if	our	pus	and	blood	were	to	be	collected	together,
Their	accumulated	mass	would	fill	a	vast	ocean,
And	if	the	residue	of	our	past	actions	were	to	be	collected	together,
Their	extent	would	be	beyond	conception	and	inexpressible.
Though	I	have	continued	endlessly	in	a	cycle	of	births	and	deaths,
Throughout	the	three	world-systems,
The	actions	that	I	have	committed	have	been	pointless	and	unproductive.
Yet,	from	amongst	all	these	many	countless	births,
The	actions	committed	in	the	course	of	just	a	single	lifetime
Could	have	been	worthwhile	if	only	I	had	trained	well,
Pursued	the	path	of	unsurpassed	enlightenment,
And	thus	attained	the	genuine	final	nirvāṇa.
But,	 swayed	 by	 the	 virulence	 of	 past	 actions	 and	 the	 great	 potency	 of
dissonant	mental	states,
I	 have	 assumed	 bodies,	 these	 networks	 of	 flesh	 and	 blood,	 and	 roamed
throughout	cyclic	existence,
Thrust	into	[a	succession	of]	prison-like	existences,
Where	the	suffering	is	hard	to	bear.
All	my	transgressions,	resonant	with	such	unbearably	intense	suffering,
Have	been	born	out	of	my	own	past	actions.
Please,	through	your	great	compassion,	shatter	the	momentum	of	[these]	past
actions,
And	reverse	the	vital	energy	of	past	actions,	[generated	by]	dissonant	mental
states!
	
When,	overpowered	by	the	influence	of	perverse	past	actions	[rooted	in]
fundamental	ignorance,
I	wander	perpetually	within	the	darkness	of	unknowing,
Why	do	you	not	release	me,	[suffusing	me]	with	the	lamplight	of	your	pristine
cognition?
When	I	can	no	longer	bear	the	continuing	fruition	of	my	transgressions	and
past	actions,
Why	do	you	not	embrace	me	with	the	enlightened	activity	of	your	great

compassion?
When	I	fall	into	the	abyss	of	error,
Why	do	you	not	catch	me	in	the	palm	of	your	swift	compassion?
When	I	am	afflicted	by	the	irresistible	diseases	of	the	three	poisons,
Why	do	you	not	cure	me	with	the	medicine	of	your	compassionate	skilful
means?
When	the	fires	of	my	suffering	—	the	continuing	maturation	of	my	own	past
actions	—	blaze,
Why	do	you	not	release	a	compassionate	shower	of	cooling	rains?
When	I	sink	into	the	swamp	of	suffering	in	cyclic	existence,
Why	do	you	not	draw	me	up	with	the	hook	of	compassionate	skilful	means?
	
Were	I	to	attain	the	resultant	[states	of	enlightenment],
By	training,	again	and	again,	in	the	three	world-systems	of	cyclic	existence,
What	need	would	there	be	for	your	sublime	compassion	then?
Given	that	this	[release]	would	be	the	potent	inheritance	of	my	[positive]	past
actions,
Would	there	be	anyone	to	whom	I	would	need	to	express	my	gratitude?
[But],	 O	 spiritual	 warrior,	 you	 who	 are	 endowed	 with	 the	 power	 of
compassion,
Since	the	momentum	of	my	[negative]	past	actions	is	so	potent,
Do	not	be	ineffective!	Do	not	be	indifferent!	Do	not	be	inactive!
From	your	heart,	O	compassionate	conquering	deity,	gaze	upon	me	now!
Draw	me	up	from	the	swamp	of	cyclic	existence!
Lead	me	swiftly	to	the	supreme	level	of	the	three	buddha-bodies.
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	VIEW
OṂ	How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	dualises	subject	and	object,
When	the	expanse	of	reality	is	free	from	conceptual	elaboration!
How	deluded	we	have	been	by	our	grasping	at	characteristics!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,
Which	is	free	from	conceptual	elaboration!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	good	and	evil,

When	Samantabhadra,	[The	Ever	Perfect],	is	beyond	good	and	evil!
How	pitiful	we	are,	clinging	to	purity	and	impurity!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse,
Which	is	free	from	the	duality	of	good	and	evil!
	
How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	sees	buddhas	[as	great]	and	sentient	beings
[as	small],
When,	in	the	state	of	sameness,	there	is	neither	great	nor	small!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	great	and	small!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
sameness!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	this	life	and	the	next,
When	the	mind	of	enlightenment	is	free	from	birth	or	death!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	birth	and	death!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	deathless,	immutable	expanse!
	
How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	dualises	form	and	material	substance,
When	the	supreme	seminal	point	is	free	from	spatial	dimensions!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	corners	and
angles!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	supreme	seminal	point,	which	is	all-
embracing	in	its	symmetry
!
23
	
How	mistaken	is	the	view	which	dualises	beginning	and	end,
When	the	essential	nature	of	the	three	times	is	unchanging!
How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 of	 transitional
processes!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	three	times,	which	is
unchanging!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	cause	and	effect,
When	the	naturally	present	pristine	cognition	arises	effortlessly!
How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 of	 effort	 and
attainment!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	naturally	present	expanse,	which

arises	without	effort!
	
How	pitiful	is	the	view	which	dualises	eternalism	and	nihilism,
When	the	pristine	cognition	of	[intrinsic]	awareness	is	free	from	eternalism
and	nihilism!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	existence	and	non-
existence!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	pristine	cognition,	which
is	beyond	eternalism	and	nihilism!
24
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	oscillates	between	biased	positions,
When	the	pure	expanse	of	reality	is	free	from	middle	and	extremes!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	middle	and
extremes!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	pure	expanse	of	reality,	which	is	free
from	a	middle	or	extremes!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	outside	and	inside,
When	the	celestial	palace	is	free	from	inner	and	outer	dimensions!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	of	spaciousness	and
confinement!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	[of	the	celestial	palace],
Which	is	free	from	the	duality	of	spaciousness	and	confinement,	or	of	inner
and	outer	dimensions!
	
How	pitiful	is	the	view	which	dualises	‘higher	and	lower’	[approaches],
When	the	sexual	centre	of	the	female	consort	is	free	from	[the	distinction
between]	higher	and	lower	[energy	centres]!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	between	higher	and
lower	[energy	centres]!
25
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	[consort’s]	secret
place,
26
Which	is	free	from	[the	distinction	between]	higher	and	lower!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	dualises	objects	and	mind,
When	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	is	free	from	individuated	distinctions!

How	 deluded	 we	 have	 been	 in	 clinging	 to	 the	 dichotomy	 between	 the
environment	and	its	inhabitants!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	[the	expanse	of]	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	which	is	unchanging!
	
How	debilitating	is	the	view	which	discriminates	between	individual	thoughts,
When	the	dynamic	of	the	male	consort	acts	unconstrictedly!
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	mistakenly	to	nominalism!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	the	awareness	holders,
who	are	free	from	conceptual	thoughts!
	
Since	pristine	cognition,	which	is	intrinsic	awareness,	has	not	arisen	within	us,
How	pitiful	is	this	mind	obscured	by	ignorance,
Which	grasps	immaterial	phenomena	as	materially	substantive!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	natural	pristine	cognition!
Since	we	have	failed	to	understand	the	nature	of	uncreated	truth,
How	tormented	is	this	intellect	of	a	bewildered	being,
Which	apprehends	the	uncreated	truth	in	terms	of	‘I’	and	‘mine’!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
uncreated!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	mentally	elucidate	the	nature	of	reality,
We	have	not	understood	that	phenomenal	appearances	are	illusory,
And	thereby	our	minds	have	become	attached	to	material	wealth!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	uncreated	reality,	which	is	free	from
attachment!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	realise	that	cyclic	existence	is	free	from	inherent
existence,
We	have	grasped	at	the	self-existence	of	things	and	their	characteristics,
And	thereby	sought	happiness	through	non-virtuous	behaviour.
How	deluded	we	have	been	in	clinging	to	the	dichotomy	between	hope	and
doubt!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	enlightenment,	which	is
untainted!
	

Since	we	have	failed	to	understand	the	truth	of	sameness	with	true	equanimity,
We	have	mistakenly	clung	to	the	permanence	of	relatives	and	friends.
How	totally	mistaken	is	this	mind	of	ignorant	people	[such	as	ourselves]!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
sameness!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	encounter	the	true	meaning	of	reality,
We	have	forsaken	truth	and	persevered	in	non-virtuous	acts.
We	have	forsaken	the	transmitted	precepts	of	the	Teacher	and	
have	been
deceived	by	the	vagaries	of	[mundane]	human	doctrines!
We	confess	this	transgression	within	the	expanse	of	supreme	bliss,	which	is
reality!
	
Since	we	have	failed	to	experience	the	natural	liberation	of	pristine	cognition,
which	is	[intrinsic]	awareness,
We	have	forsaken	the	modality	of	intrinsic	awareness,	and	persevered	in
distracted	acts.
Take	pity	on	these	sentient	beings	who	are	devoid	of	such	truthful	experience!
We	 confess	 this	 transgression	 within	 the	 expanse,	 which	 is	 free	 from
distraction!
	
To	the	assembled	deities	of	pristine	cognition,	to	the	protectors	who	uphold
the	commitments,
And	to	those	yogins	who	have	fulfilled	their	commitments	in	accordance	with
the	textual	elucidation,
We	remorsefully	confess	all	our	own	faults,
[We	remorsefully	confess]	all	our	deviations	and	obscurations	generated	by
our	unrealised	view!
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	ALL	THOSE	GONE	TO
BLISS
OṂ	We	pray	to	all	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	throughout	the	three	times,
To	you,	the	conquerors,	and	your	retinues,
And	to	all	who	maintain	the	commitments	of	indestructible	reality,

Please,	each	of	you,	attend	to	us!
	
Having	initially	generated	the	mind	[aspiring]	to	supreme	enlightenment,
In	order	to	actualise	the	indestructible	reality	of	buddha-body,	speech	and
mind,
On	the	enlightened	plain	of	an	accomplished	awareness	holder,
We	have	adopted	numerous	secret	commitments,
Relating	to	both	the	meditational	deities	and	our	vajra-masters,
And	we	have	pledged	not	to	transgress	these	injunctions,	to	which	we	are
bound,
[For	to	do	so]	would	lead	to	a	birth	in	the	hells,
Driven	by	our	past	actions	and	misfortunes.
	
[Nonetheless],	swayed	by	attachment,	aversion,	delusion,	pride,	envy	and	so
forth,
We	have	continued	to	err:
Should	we	have	belittled	the	vajra-master	in	our	hearts,	the	‘lamp	of	the
teaching’,
And	thus	allowed	our	commitments	to	degenerate,
And	should	we	have	harboured	ill	will	and	mistaken	attitudes
Towards	the	vajra-companions	who	share	our	commitments,
For	[whatever]	such	[harm	we	have	thus	created],
We	confess	all	our	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of	buddha-body!
	
Should	we	have	not	clearly	visualised	the	seals	of	the	meditational	deity,
27
Should	we	have	been	deficient	in	our	mantra	recitations	during	our	ritual
service,
Should	we	have	failed	to	carry	out	the	rites	through	which	both	ritual	service
and	attainment	are	fulfilled,
Especially	with	respect	to	the	ritual	offerings	of	six	session	[yoga],
And	should	we	have	been	incapable	of	practising	in	accordance	with	the
teachings	and	the	texts,
We	confess	all	such	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of	buddha-speech!
	
Should	we	have	degraded	the	commitments,	which	the	vajra-master	imparted
as	an	esoteric	instruction	of	buddha-mind,

Commitments	he	orally	seeded	in	our	hearts,	through	the	grace	of	his	loving
kindness,
And	should	we	have	even	transgressed	our	secret	name,
28
	by	divulging	it
carelessly,
We	confess	all	such	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of	buddha-mind!
We	[also]	confess	our	degenerations	of	the	ancillary	commitments,
Caused	by	our	failure	to	realise	the	essential	sameness	of	phenomena.
We	confess	our	degenerations	of	the	commitments	relating	to	ritual	service
and	attainment,
Caused	by	our	falling	into	the	sleep	of	idleness	and	apathy.
We	confess	[each	and	every	one	of	our]	degenerations	of	the	commitments	of
buddha-body,	speech	and	mind,
Caused	by	our	transgressions,	enacted	physically,	verbally	and	mentally!
	
In	the	presence	of	our	revered	spiritual	teachers,
We	confess	our	inadequate	utensils	and	resources.
In	the	presence	of	the	assembled	meditational	deities,
We	confess	our	prejudices	towards	their	practices	of	visualisation.
29
In	the	presence	of	the	four	classes	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
We	confess	our	degenerations	of	our	commitments	and	pledges.
In	the	presence	of	the	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings,
We	confess	our	[tardy]	torma-offerings,	whether	years	or	months	overdue.
In	the	presence	of	our	parents	of	the	three	times,
We	confess	our	failure	to	repay	their	kindness.
In	the	presence	of	our	spiritual	brothers	and	sisters,
We	confess	our	inadequate	fervour	for	upholding	the	commitments.
In	the	presence	of	the	six	classes	of	sentient	beings,
We	confess	the	inadequacy	of	our	compassion	and	altruism.
	
We	confess	all	our	contradictions	and	degenerations:
Those	relating	to	the	
prātimokṣa
	vows,
Those	relating	to	the	trainings	cultivated	by	the	bodhisattvas,
And	those	relating	to	the	commitments	upheld	by	the	awareness	holders.
30
From	now	on	we	shall	not	conceal	[such	degenerations]
And	we	resolve	to	guard	against	any	and	every	infraction!
As	we	confess	all	our	negative	obscurations	born	of	indulging	in	the	three

poisons,
Please	purify	[all	our	obscurations]
And	grant	us	the	supreme	and	common	accomplishments	of	buddha-body,
speech	and	mind!
	
The	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	[of	Vajrasattva]	should	be	recited	[repeatedly]	in
conjunction	with	these	verses	and	thus	the	confession	will	be	effected.
	
This	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession	in	the	Presence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,
Which	 is	 a	 supporting	 text	 to	 the	
Reparation	 and	 Confession:	 Natural
Liberation	of	Degenerations
,	
31
	is	thus	presented.
Be	persevering	with	regard	to	this	practice,	O	Children	of	Posterity!
May	this	practice	be	encountered	by	all	those	of	the	future	who	have	a
[positive]	inheritance	of	past	actions!
	
This	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession,	in	the	Presence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	was	extracted	from	the	
Tantra	of	Immaculate
Confession
	
by	Padmākara,	the	preceptor	of	Oḍḍiyāna.	May	[the	influence	of]
this	sublime	teaching	not	be	exhausted	until	all	of	cyclic	existence	is	emptied!
	
May	virtue	prevail!
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
gter-rgya!	sbas-rgya!	gtad-rgya!
32
A	treasure	of	Karma	Lingpa!

8
Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications
and	Signs	of	Death
CONTEXT
Since	 the	 human	 body	 is	 regarded	 as	 an	 abode	 of	 deities,	 it	 is	 the
responsibility	of	the	practitioner	to	protect	the	body	from	the	causes	of
harm,	disease	and	premature	death	and	to	foster	the	conditions	which
support	an	active	and	unencumbered	life	up	to	the	natural	exhaustion	of
the	lifespan.
This	chapter	describes	six	categories	of	signs	indicative	of	the	time	of
death,	together	with	a	variety	of	techniques	for	purposefully	eliciting
specific	indications	of	death.	Also	described,	in	the	section	titled	‘Signs
of	Extremely	Near	Death’,	are	the	experiential	and	outer	signs	that	occur
during	the	process	of	dying.	Lastly,	the	signs	that	are	indicative	of	the
nature	of	the	future	rebirth,	which	occur	at	or	after	death,	are	described.
This	chapter	and	the	following	chapter:	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear
through	 the	 Ritual	 Deception	 of	 Death
	 are	 inextricably	 interlinked.
Should	the	predictive	signs	described	in	this	chapter	definitively	arise,
then	 it	 is	 expected	 that	 the	 appropriate	 practices	 described	 in	 the
following	 chapter:	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Fear	 through	 the	 Ritual
Deception	of	Death
	should	be	undertaken	without	delay.
The	sophisticated	description	of	the	process	of	dying,	contained	in	the
section	‘Signs	of	Extremely	Near	Death’,	concurs	with	the	understanding
of	the	process	of	death	commonly	found	in	classical	Buddhist	literature.
h
This	section	forms	a	component	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
	(Chapter
11)	and	it	is	a	vital	aspect	of	the	guidance	to	be	given	by	a	qualified
spiritual	teacher	at	the	time	of	death.
The	predictive	signs	of	death,	however,	are	more	idiosyncratic	and
show	influences	from	Tibetan	folklore	and	traditional	medicine.	Further,
in	terms	of	the	predictive	signs	of	death,	it	is	said	that	the	
subtler	signs

described	 here	 can	 only	 be	 accurately	 recognised	 by	 those	 who	 are
continuously	engaged	in	meditative	practice.
The	elicitation	and	analysis	of	the	predictive	signs	is	not	a	common
practice	today,	except,	in	the	case	of	certain	signs,	in	the	context	of
traditional	 medicine.	 Nonetheless,	 this	 text	 demonstrates	 a	 powerful
sensitivity	 to	 impermanence	 and	 a	 sustained	 sensitivity	 to	 one’s
immediate	experience.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	the	Visual
Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
,
1
	an	extract	from	the	
Peace	ful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	the	naturally	radiant	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,
[Manifestations	of]	the	three	buddha-bodies!
	
This	natural	liberation	through	[the	recognition	of]	signs
Which	is	a	technique	for	analysing	[the	onset	of]	death
Is	presented	as	a	supporting	text	to	the	
Natural	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
.
3
Study	it	repeatedly,	O	Child	of	Buddha	Nature.
SAMAYA!
INTRODUCTION
Alas!	This	illusory	and	feeble	aggregate	of	form,
Created	from	compounded	past	actions	and	conditions,
Like	[the	flame	of]	a	butter	lamp	blowing	in	the	wind,	cannot	last	for	ever.
4
Nothing	at	all	exists	which	is	not	subject	to	the	conditioning	of	death,
And	indeed,	since	it	is	uncertain	when	death	will	occur,
One	should	constantly	be	cognisant	of	the	signs	of	[impending]	death,
And	strive	after	[the	accumulation	of]	virtue.
There	are	two	[primary]	conditions	responsible	for	the	death	of	human	beings:
[First]	untimely	death	and	[second]	death	due	to	the	[natural]	exhaustion	of

the	lifespan.
5
Untimely	or	sudden	death	may	be	averted,
By	successful	application	of	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
,
6
But	death	due	to	the	[natural]	exhaustion	of	the	lifespan
Is	like	the	burning	out	of	a	butter	lamp,
So	there	is	no	way	of	averting	this	through	‘ritual	deception’,
And	thus,	[if	this	is	indicated],	one	should	make	preparations	to	depart.
In	either	case,	[however],	it	is	most	important	to	engage	in	the	following
analysis.
	
This	teaching	[on	the	visual	indications	and	signs	of	death]
Is	presented	in	terms	of	six	general	topics,	namely:
External,	internal,	and	secret	signs	of	death,
Signs	of	remote	death,	signs	of	near	death,
And,	lastly,	miscellaneous	signs	of	death.
	
When	investigating	[the	time	of]	death,
First	one	should	make	offerings
To	the	[visualised]	assemblies	of	spiritual	teachers,	meditational	deities	and
ḍākin
ῑ
s,
And	please	the	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings	with	torma-offerings.
Then,	one	should	present	feast-offerings	to	one’s	fellow	practitioners,
And	also	engage	in	charitable	acts.
Then,	[the	signs	of]	death	should	be	examined	in	the	following	way.
EXTERNAL	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
First,	when	the	examination	of	external	[signs]	is	made,
It	is	the	bodily	characteristics	that	should	be	investigated,
Because	the	signs	of	death	will	arise	in	relation	to	these	[characteristics].
The	body	is	composed	of	the	four	elements,
Thus	the	following	portents	of	its	demise
Will	arise	prior	[to	the	time	of	death]:
Loss	of	appetite,	dullness	of	the	sense	faculties,
A	feeling	of	anger	which	consumes	body,	speech	and	mind,

Distracted	or	depressed	thoughts,
Disturbed	dreams,	character	changes,	and	fading	complexion.
These	are	the	portents	[indicating]	that	life	[-threatening]	hindrances	may
arise.
	
More	 particularly,	 there	 are	 the	 following	 specifically	 physical	 signs	 of
death:
7
If	the	fingernails	and	toenails	become	bloodless	or	lustreless,
[This	indicates]	death	after	nine	months,	less	half	a	day.
If	the	cornea	of	the	eyes	begin	to	cloud	over,
[This	indicates]	death	after	five	months.
If	the	hair	on	the	nape	of	the	neck	grows	upwards,
[This	indicates]	death	after	three	months.
	
[Then	 again,	 more	 generally],	 if	 one	 urinates,	 defecates	 and	 sneezes
simultaneously,
This	too	is	an	indication	of	death.
Also,	if	one’s	urine	falls	in	two	forks,
If	one’s	muscles	become	utterly	loose	and	flabby,
If	faeces	are	excreted	and	semen	ejaculated	simultaneously,
If	one’s	body	odour	changes	dramatically,
If	one’s	conduct	changes	dramatically,
If	one	blushes	little	and	one’s	complexion	becomes	pallid,
If	the	tone	of	one’s	voice	becomes	thin,	and	one’s	eyes	become	sunken,
If	the	space	above	the	bridge	of	the	nose	becomes	exfoliated,
If	the	eyes	do	not	clearly	perceive	forms,
Or	else	if	they	perceive	incorrectly,	and	so	forth,
If	[the	ears]	do	not	hear,	or	else	hear	incorrectly,
If	[the	nose]	does	not	smell,	or	else	smells	incorrectly,
If	[the	tongue]	does	not	taste,	or	else	tastes	incorrectly,
If	the	point	between	the	eyebrows	is	effaced,
Or	evaporation	ceases	from	the	crown	of	the	head,
These	[signs]	may	all	indicate	that	one	has	fallen	into	the	hands	of	the	Lord	of
Death.
8
Furthermore,	while	in	good	health,
[The	following	technique	for	eliciting	indications	can	also	be	applied]:

If,	when	the	[closed]	eyes	are	pressed	with	the	fingers,
The	[minute]	circles	of	light	which	appear
Are	absent	from	the	lower	part	of	the	left	eye,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	six	months,
But	if	they	are	absent	from	the	upper	part	[of	that	eye],
One	may	die	after	three	months.
If	these	[same	circles]	are	absent	from	the	direction	of	the	[left]	nostril,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	one	month.
If	they	are	absent	from	the	direction	of	the	[left]	ear,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	two	months.
	
[Resuming	this	process,	focusing	on	the	right	eye]:
If	[the	circles]	are	absent	from	the	lower	part	of	the	right	eye,
One	should	know	that	one	may	die	after	ten	days.
If	they	are	absent	from	the	upper	part	[of	the	right	eye],
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	five	days.
If	they	are	absent	from	the	direction	of	the	[right]	ear,
[This	indicates	that	one	may	die]	after	three	days;
And	if	they	are	absent	from	the	direction	of	the	[right]	nostril,
One	should	know	that	one	may	die	after	two	days,	even	if	one	is	not	sick.
	
Secondly,	if	when	the	ears	are	cupped	with	the	fingers,
No	humming	sound	is	heard	throughout	an	entire	day,
9
One	should	know	that	one	might	die	after	six	years.
If	it	is	absent	for	two	days,
One	may	die	after	six	years	less	two	months.
Similarly,	for	each	additional	day	[that	the	sound	is	absent],
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die,	decrementally,	after	three	fewer	months.
That	is,	if	[the	sound]	is	absent	for	a	third	or	fourth	day,
Death	may	come	after	three	[or	six]	fewer	months,	respectively.
It	has	also	been	said	that	the	number	of	days	[indicated]	might	not	necessarily
be	definite.
There	are	also	other	[external]	signs	of	death,	such	as:
If	one	feels	[continuously]	angry	and	short-tempered,
If	one	feels	fearful,	wherever	one	may	be,
If	one’s	positive	perspective,	devotion,	and	similar	qualities	ebb	away,

If	one	feels	aversion	towards	saintly	beings,
If	one	feels	depressed,	wherever	one	may	be,	and	[constantly]	wishes	to	go
[elsewhere],
If	one	wishes	to	be	separated	from	sympathetic	Buddhist	companions,
If	one	delights	in	the	social	diversions	and	distracting	activities	of	cyclic
existence,
Or	if	one	feels	excessive	attachment,	aversion,	pride,	or	envy,
These	may	all	indicate	that	one	has	fallen	into	the	hands	of	the	Lord	of	Death.
	
These,	[the	above],	are	called	‘the	external	signs	of	death’,
Which,	it	is	said,	can	be	averted	by	the	ritual	deception	of	death.
The	techniques,	by	which	they	are	averted,	should	be	studied,
By	referring	to	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
	[chapter,	which	follows].
INTERNAL	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
The	investigation	of	the	internal	signs	of	death
Comprises	the	examination	of	vital	breath	and	the	examination	of	dreams.
	
Examination	of	the	Vital	Breath
10
	
Around	the	time	of	the	[vernal	or	autumnal]	equinox,
At	daybreak	on	the	first	day	[of	the	lunar	month],
One	should	sit	upright,	with	the	body	in	the	seven-point	posture	of	Vairocana.
Then,	one	should	observe	the	vital	breath,	and	note	from	which	[nostril]	this
emerges.
If,	at	this	time,	the	vital	breath	is	moving	through	the	left	nostril,
Then,	for	a	period	of	three	days,	the	breath	will	continue	to	move	exclusively
through	the	left	nostril,
But	then	on	the	fourth	day	it	will	change,
And	proceed	to	move	through	the	right	nostril	for	three	days.
Thus	it	will	alternate	in	this	way	every	three	days	between	the	two	nostrils.
	
[Observe	this	process	and]	count	the	number	of	days	diligently,	and	do	not
make	a	mistake.

If	no	error	is	made	[in	the	counting],	and	if	the	breath	moves	successively	in
this	way,
And	then	begins	to	move	erratically	after	one	and	a	half	months,
It	is	said	that	one	may	die	after	[a	further]	six	months.
If	the	breath	begins	to	move	erratically	after	one	month,
It	is	said	that	severe	misfortunes	may	occur.
If	it	begins	to	move	erratically	after	two	weeks,
[It	is	said	that]	serious	illness	may	occur.
If	it	moves	erratically	after	five	days,
11
[It	is	said	that]	slander	and	calumny	may	occur.
If	[the	breath]	does	not	alternate	[from	one	nostril	to	the	other]	over	a	ten-day
period,
Then,	as	soon	as	it	does	change,	one	may	die.
If	it	moves	simultaneously	through	both	nostrils	and	the	mouth,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	half	a	day.
And	if	it	ceases	to	move	through	the	nose	and	instead	moves	only	through	the
mouth,
It	is	said	that	one	will	die	immediately.
	
Examination	of	the	Signs	of	Death	which	Occur	in	Dreams
12
	
[First,	one	should	know	that]	those	dreams	which	occur	in	the	late	evening	or
around	midnight	are	unreliable,
But	if	one	dreams	between	dawn	and	daybreak	that:
One	is	riding	a	cat	or	a	white	monkey	with	a	red	face,
While	moving	further	and	further	towards	the	east,
It	is	said	that	this	is	a	sign	of	death	caused	by	king	spirits.
13
If	one	dreams	of	riding	a	tiger,	fox,	or	corpse,
Or	of	riding	a	buffalo,	pig,	camel,	or	donkey,
While	moving	further	and	further	towards	the	south,
This	is	a	sign	of	death	[indicating	that]	one	has	fallen	into	the	hands	of	Yama.
	
Furthermore,	if	one	dreams	of	eating	faeces,
Of	wearing	black	clothes	of	yak	hair,	while	plunging	downwards,
Of	being	trapped	in	a	wicker-basket	or	snare,
Of	being	bound	with	iron	chains,

Or	of	copulating	repeatedly	with	a	black	figure	or	animal,
These	are	[also]	signs	[which	are	indicative]	of	death.
	
If	one	dreams	of	being	disembowelled	by	a	fierce	black	woman,
And	that	one’s	entrails	are	spilling	out,
Or	that	a	black	man	arrives,	wielding	an	iron	mace,
And	coming	into	one’s	presence,	he	tells	you	to	depart,
Or	[if	one	dreams]	that	one	is	being	dragged	along	by	a	black	rope	attached	to
the	neck,
Or	that	one	is	inside	a	lofty	red-coloured	castle,
Surrounded	by	a	moat	and	perimeter	wall,
Or	[if	one	dreams]	of	being	decapitated	and	having	one’s	head	carried	off	by
another,
Or	of	being	surrounded	by	crows,	anguished	spirits,	or	villains,
Or	of	being	willingly	led	away,	or	leaving	[home]	in	a	bridal	procession,
Of	being	naked,	with	one’s	hair	cut	off	and	beard	shaved,
Of	constantly	associating	with	friends	who	have	died,
Of	being	dragged	along	by	a	crowd	of	dead	people,
Of	jumping	into	water,	sinking	into	mud,	or	being	swallowed	by	fish,
Of	entering	a	womb	and	falling	asleep,
Of	being	overcome	in	a	battle,	in	which	the	other	side	is	victorious,
Of	wearing	red	clothing,	and	being	adorned	with	red	garlands,
Of	repeatedly	picking	red	flowers,
Of	climbing	a	mountain	of	red	shellac,
Of	having	one’s	head	wrapped	in	a	red	silk	turban,
Of	twigs	growing	on	the	crown	of	your	head,	and	birds	nesting	there,
Of	falling	asleep	repeatedly	in	a	terrifying	charnel	ground,
Of	being	old,	and	carrying	a	heavy	burden,
Of	the	sun	and	moon	falling	to	the	plains,	leaving	one	shrouded	in	darkness,
Of	jumping	headlong	into	a	pit,
Of	dancing	together	with	a	host	of	ogres,
Or	setting	out,	thinking	one	will	roam	to	unfamiliar	distant	lands,	never	to
return	—
If	such	dreams	and	others	like	them	occur	when	one	is	not	sick,	they	are
indefinite	[with	respect	to	the	time	of	death],
And	 one	 may	 be	 released	 [from	 their	 indications]	 by	 means	 of	 the
[appropriate]	ritual	service.

If,	however,	such	dreams	continually	recur,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	die	within	a	year.
	
If	one	should	dream	of	the	sun	and	moon	being	eclipsed,
Falling	to	the	plains,	or	repeatedly	setting,
One’s	father,	mother,	or	teacher	may	die,
And	it	is	said	that	if	they	are	sick	at	the	time,
Their	death	will	be	inevitable.
	
The	above	are	called	the	‘internal	signs	of	death’,
Which	are	slightly	more	difficult	[to	avert]
Through	ritual	deception	than	the	aforementioned	[external	signs].
SECRET	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
The	secret	signs	of	death	will	[now]	be	described.
When	the	external	and	internal	signs	of	death	occur,
They	can	be	averted	by	repeatedly	performing	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
.
If,	however,	the	external	and	internal	signs	are	not	[successfully]	reversed,
One	should	then	examine	the	secret	signs	in	the	following	way:
Having	first	generated	the	mind	[aspiring]	to	supreme	enlightenment,
14
And	then	taken	refuge	and	offered	prayers,
One	should	examine,	on	the	morning	of	the	first	day	of	the	month,
The	flow	of	one’s	semen	or	menstrual	blood.
It	is	said	that	if	the	semen	of	a	man	is	blackish	yellow,
Or	if	the	menstrual	blood	of	a	woman	is	whitish,
Death	may	occur	after	two	months.
If	the	semen	of	a	man	is	reddish,
He	may	die	or	be	subjected	to	slander	after	six	months.
However,	if	its	[natural]	whiteness	is	undiminished,
[This	indicates	that]	there	is	no	obstacle	[to	life],
And	[the	semen]	should	be	inhaled	through	the	nose,	while	it	is	still	warm.
This	is	itself	a	rite	associated	with	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
.
	
Furthermore,	if	semen	flows	without	any	[blissful]	sensation,

And	it	is	interspersed	with	quicksilver-like	globules,	the	size	of	sesame	seeds,
It	is	said	that	one	will	die	[imminently].
If	the	flow	of	a	woman’s	menstrual	blood	is	unceasing,
And	if	at	that	time	she	dreams	she	is	picking	red	flowers,
[This	indicates	that]	death	will	[soon]	follow.
Moreover,	if	a	man	has	continual	spermatorrhoea,
Even	when	not	engaged	in	sexual	intercourse,
It	is	said	that	he	may	die	after	four	months.
If	a	black	mole	suddenly	appears	for	the	first	time,
At	the	orifice	of	the	glans	penis,
Or	if	one	has	an	undistracted	and	constant	[sexual]	desire,	thinking	only	of
women,
And	one	allows	one’s	commitments	in	respect	of	the	third	empowerment	to
degenerate,
15
These	are	not	only	signs	of	death,
But	also	omens	that	one	will	later	proceed	to	[rebirth	in]	the	indestructible
hells.
[Therefore],	if	one	does	not	confess	[and	repair]	these	[degenerations]	fully,
One	will	experience	the	fierce	sufferings	of	the	hells.
In	order	for	the	confession	to	be	effective,	however,
You	should	perform	the	ritual	deception	pertaining	to	the	secret	[signs	of]
death,
Yet	[death]	will	be	harder	to	deceive	than	in	the	two	preceding	categories.
	
The	above	are	called	the	‘secret	signs	of	death’.
SIGNS	OF	REMOTE	DEATH
The	examination	of	the	signs	of	death	when	it	is	[still]	years	or	months	away
Should	be	made	by	scrutinising	the	‘shadow	of	one’s	lifespan’,
Optically	projected	onto	the	sky,	in	the	way	described	below.
[These	indications	may	show	that]	one	will	die,	or	that	one	will	not	die,
And	that	the	averting	[of	death]	will	be	possible,	or	impossible.
16
	
[To	begin],	offerings	should	be	made	to	the	spiritual	teacher,	and	the	Three

Precious	Jewels,
Torma
-offerings	should	be	presented	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s	and	protectors	of	the
[sacred]	teachings;
And	then,	after	going	for	refuge	and	offering	prayers,
The	examination	should	be	made	[as	follows]:
	
In	an	isolated	and	delightful	place,
In	the	morning	or	afternoon	of	the	first	day	of	the	month,
Or	in	the	evening	or	at	dawn	of	the	fifteenth	day,
17
When	the	sky	is	clear	and	there	is	no	wind,
One	should	sit	naked	in	a	comfortable	spot,
And	there,	after	praying	fervently,
One	should	repeat	the	following	mantra	one	hundred	times:
OṂ	ĀYUṢE	SAṂHĀRAKEŚVARE	HŪṂ	PHAṬ
18
Then,	standing	up,	naked,	one	should	bow	down	seven	times
To	each	of	the	gods	of	the	[ten]	directions,
And	then,	directly	stretching	out	one’s	four	limbs,
While	holding	in	one’s	hand	a	rosary	or	suitable	symbolic	hand-implement,
19
One	should	inscribe	the	letter	A	on	the	heart	of	one’s	shadow.
20
[Next],	without	blinking,	one	should	gaze	fixedly	at	the	letter	A	[drawn]	at	the
heart	[of	the	shadow],
And	focus	one’s	awareness	upon	[the	letter	A].
Then,	once	the	eyes	have	grown	numb	[through	strain],
One	should	look	up	into	the	centre	of	the	cloudless	sky,
At	which	time	one’s	own	form	should	become	visible	in	the	sky.
One	should	then	know	that	if	the	head	and	body	of	this	[reflected	image]	are
intact,	and	[the	image]	is	pale	in	colour,
This	is	an	auspicious	sign	that	there	will	be	no	obstacles	and	that	one	will	not
die	[imminently].
	
If	one’s	reflected	image	is	not	visible	in	the	sky,
[First],	perform	the	rite	for	affirmation	of	vows,
And,	while	sitting	in	the	‘indestructible	cross-legged	posture’,
With	the	hands	in	the	‘gesture	of	meditative	equipoise’,
21
Look	[for	the	image	again],	in	the	above	manner.

If	[one’s	reflected	image]	still	does	not	appear,
It	 may	 not	 be	 significant,	 as	 it	 may	 have	 been	 obscured	 by	 clouds	 or
atmospheric	winds,
In	which	case,	the	examination	should	be	postponed	until	the	sky	is	clear.
[When	the	reflected	image	does	become	visible,	however,]
Its	 examination	 entails	 three	 considerations:	 of	 completeness,	 shape,	 and
colour.
	
First,	 the	 completeness	 [of	 the	 reflected	 image]	 should	 be	 examined	 as
follows:
When	[assessing]	the	completeness	of	the	image
In	relation	to	the	number	of	years	[one	is	yet	to	live],
If	the	hand-held	implement	is	missing,
This	[indication]	is	called	the	‘separation	from	the	deity	on	whom	one	has
relied’,
22
And	it	indicates	that	one’s	life	may	end	in	seven	years’	time.
If	the	right	hand	is	missing,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	five	years.
If	the	left	hand	is	missing,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	three	years.
If	the	right	leg	is	missing	below	the	knee,
One	may	die	after	two	years.
If	the	left	leg	is	missing,
[This	indicates	that]	one	may	die	after	one	year.
	
Next,	when	[assessing]	the	completeness	[of	the	image]
In	relation	to	the	number	of	months	[one	is	yet	to	live]:
If	the	right	part	of	the	head	is	missing,
One	may	die	after	nine	months.
If	the	left	part	of	the	head	is	missing,
One	may	die	after	seven	months.
If	the	head	is	missing	above	the	neck,
One	may	die	after	five	months.
If	the	head	and	the	neck	are	both	missing,
One	may	die	after	three	months.
If	the	upper	trunk	is	missing,

One	may	die	after	two	months.
If	the	lower	trunk	is	missing,
One	may	die	after	one	month.
	
Next,	when	[assessing]	the	completeness	[of	the	image]
In	relation	to	the	number	of	days	[one	is	yet	to	live]:
If	the	right	side	of	the	body	is	missing,
One	may	die	in	twenty-nine	days.
If	the	left	side	[of	the	body]	is	missing,
One	may	die	in	twenty-one	days.
	
Second,	the	[overall]	shape	[of	the	image]	should	be	examined	as	follows:
If	[the	image]	is	square,	one	may	die	after	five	months.
If	it	is	round,	one	may	die	after	four	months.
If	it	is	semicircular,	one	may	die	after	three	months,
And	if	it	is	oblong,	one	may	die	after	two	months.
In	all	these	cases,	death	may	be	averted	by	ritual	deception.
However,	if	it	is	triangular,	one	will	die	after	one	month.
If	it	resembles	a	bundled	corpse,	one	will	die	after	half	a	month.
If	it	is	upside	down,
23
	one	will	die	after	ten	days.
In	these	last	three	cases,	death	cannot	be	averted	and	is	absolutely	inevitable.
Third,	the	colour	[of	the	image]	should	be	examined	as	follows:
If	it	is	white	in	colour,	and	fades	from	the	centre,
This	is	a	sign	that	one	has	displeased	serpentine	water	spirits,	king	spirits,	and
gods.
If	it	is	black	in	colour,	and	fades	from	the	right,
This	 is	 a	 sign	 that	 one	 has	 been	 overwhelmed	 by	 beguiling	 forces	 and
imprecatory	female	spirits.
If	it	is	red	in	colour,	and	fades	from	the	left,
This	is	a	sign	that	one	has	been	seized	by	martial	haunting	spirits,	and	by
one’s	own	lifelong	companion	gods,
Or	else	that	one	will	encounter	woundings	and	diseases.
If	it	is	yellow	in	colour,	and	fades	from	the	head,
This	is	a	sign	that	one	has	been	seized	by	serpentine	water	spirits,	king	spirits
and	bewitchers.
If	it	is	blue	in	colour,	and	fades	from	the	legs,

This	is	a	sign	that	one	has	been	seized	by	serpentine	water	spirits	and	lake-
dwelling	medicinal	spirits.
If	it	is	hazy	and	diffuse,
This	is	a	sign	that	one	has	been	seized	by	imprecatory	female	spirits	and	the
acolytes	of	Yama.
If	it	appears	yellowish	and	uneven,
[This	is	a	sign	that	one	has	been	seized]	by	the	spirit	lords	of	the	soil.
If	it	is	garish,	irregular,	and	variegated,
[This	indicates	that]	one	has	been	seized	by	the	eight	classes	of	spirits,
Comprising	the	diverse	beguiling	forces	of	death.
All	 these	 are	 [the	 signs]	 recognised	 with	 respect	 to	 the	 colours	 [of	 the
reflected	image].
	
When	any	of	the	above	signs	of	death	occur,
One	should	persevere	with	[the	practices	set	down	in]	the	
Ritual	Deception	of
Death
,
And	then	re-examine	[the	image],	in	the	manner	described	above.
If	the	limbs	are	complete,
[Death]	may	be	ritually	deceived.
But	if	the	ritual	deception	of	death	fails	to	be	effective,	even	after	being
applied	three	times,
This	is	a	sign	that	the	time	has	come	for	one’s	life	to	end.
Therefore,	those	of	highest	[potential]	should	maintain	the	view,
Which	accords	with	the	profound	abiding	nature	[of	reality],
24
Those	 of	 average	 [potential]	 should	 meditate	 on	 the	 meditational	 deity,
according	to	the	generation	and	perfection	stages,
And	those	of	lowest	[potential]	should	persevere	with	the	accumulation	[of
merit].
	
The	above	is	the	analysis	of	the	reflected	image	in	the	sky.
SIGNS	OF	NEAR	DEATH
The	analysis	of	the	signs	of	near	death	is	now	presented.
The	examination	of	[the	signs]	described	so	far	should	be	made	when	one	is	in

good	health,
For	[at	that	time]	there	are	[still]	many	possibilities	[for	recovery],	because	the
signs	of	a	remote	death	can	be	ritually	deceived.
Here,	however,	with	regard	to	a	sick	person,
The	signs	indicative	of	[near]	death	arise	as	follows:
	
If	one’s	gums	grow	grimy	and	black,
This	is	called	the	‘gathering	of	the	personal	demons	of	the	elements’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nine	days.
If	the	nostrils	sag	inwards	and	deflate,
This	is	called	the	‘blockage	of	the	passageway	of	the	vital	breath’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nine	days.
If	the	limbs	are	subject	to	repeated	fits	of	expansion	and	contraction,
This	is	called	the	‘scaling	of	the	mountain	of	the	elements’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	five	days.
If	the	eyes	stare	fixedly,	without	blinking,
This	is	called	the	‘escape	of	the	mother-like	vital	breath’,
25
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	three	days.
If	the	cheeks	sag	inwards,
This	is	called	the	‘rupture	of	the	edge	of	the	earth	element’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	at	daybreak,	ten	days	later.
If	breathing	is	repeatedly	agitated,
This	is	called	the	‘collision	of	vital	energy	and	mind’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	six	days.
26
If	the	tip	of	the	nose	inclines	to	the	right	or	left,
This	is	called	the	‘cutting	off	of	the	bridge	of	the	nose’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	seven	days.
If	tears	flow	uncontrollably	from	the	eyes,
This	is	called	the	‘impediment’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	five	days.
If	the	right	or	left	cheek	sags	inwards,
This	is	called	the	‘cutting	off	of	the	intervening	muscle’,
And	it	indicates	that	[one	may	die]	after	one	day.
If	the	upper	and	lower	teeth	become	locked,
This	is	called	the	‘blockage	of	the	path	of	the	elements’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	two	and	a	half	days.

If	a	black	spot	appears	on	the	tongue,
It	is	certain	that	one	will	die	after	two	days.
If	the	ears	lie	flat	against	the	head,
This	is	called	the	‘blockage	of	the	stairway	of	the	ears’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	within	half	a	day.
If	the	xiphoid	of	the	chest	sags	inward,
This	is	called	the	‘rupture	of	the	support	of	the	water	element’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	two	weeks.
If	the	hands	shake	for	a	prolonged	time,	when	standing	or	sitting,
One	should	know	that	one	may	quickly	die.
	
Other	signs	of	[near]	death	should	also	be	examined	in	the	following	way:
At	noon	one	should	face	towards	the	south,
Placing	the	elbows	on	the	knees,
Whereupon,	lifting	up	one’s	hand,
One	should	place	[the	wrist]	at	the	point	between	the	eyebrows,
And	focus	both	eyes	upon	one’s	hand.
[The	image	of	the	arm]	will	appear	very	thin,	and	if	it	then	vanishes,
This	is	called	the	‘severing	of	the	bond	between	atmosphere	and	earth’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nineteen	days.
	
[Or	else,	one	should	position	oneself	at	sunrise]	with	a	pool	or	pond	to	the
east,
And	stand	up	and	gaze	at	the	surface	of	a	wall	towards	the	west.
Two	superimposed	shadows	will	appear,	one	above	the	other,
And	if	the	upper	shadow	disappears,
This	is	called	the	‘fall	of	a	rider	on	a	white	lioness	from	the	slopes	of	Mount
Sumeru’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	fifteen	and	a	half	days.
	
[Alternatively,	one	should	examine	irregularities	in	one’s	urine	specimen]:
27
In	the	morning	after	a	night	when	one	has	not	engaged	in	sexual	intercourse,
Drunk	alcohol,	or	talked	excessively,
One	 should	 fill	 a	 clay	 container	 with	 one’s	 [first]	 urine,	 at	 sunrise,	 and
examine	it.
If	[the	urine]	has	a	bluish	or	reddish	vapour	which	then	disappears,

This	is	called	the	‘vanishing	of	the	froth	of	the	ocean’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	will	certainly	die	after	nine	days.
If	the	vapour	is	blackish	and	putrid,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	die	after	one	day.
If	the	vapour	is	red	and	spotted,	one	may	die	after	nine	[days].
	
[Alternatively],	one	should	defecate	at	sunrise,
And	if	no	vapour	arises	from	[the	faeces],
This	is	called	the	‘ceasing	of	monks’	smoke	in	the	cities	of	the	earth	element’,
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	nine	days.
	
[Further],	if,	when	the	[closed]	eyes	are	pressed,	no	circles	of	light	appear,
This	is	called	the	‘setting	of	the	unchanging	sun	at	the	summit	of	Mount
Sumeru’,
28
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	three	or	seven	days.
[Further],	if,	when	the	ears	are	cupped	with	the	fingers,
The	humming	sound	which	is	[normally]	present	is	absent,
This	is	called	the	‘interruption	of	the	natural	sound	of	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s	from	within
Mount	Sumeru’,
29
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	seven	or	thirteen	days.
	
[Alternatively],	on	a	morning	when	the	sun	is	shining,
One	should	turn	one’s	back	to	the	sun,
And	if	no	evaporation	[is	seen	to]	rise	from	the	crown	of	one’s	shadow,
This	is	called	the	‘rupturing	of	the	Wish-granting	Tree	from	the	Summit	of
Mount	Sumeru’,
30
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	five	days.
	
[Also],	if	a	single	tuft	of	hair	exceptionally	rises	upwards	from	the	posterior
fontanelles,
This	is	called	‘the	black	lord	of	death,	one-legged	Yavati,	arising	as	an	enemy
against	the	Wish-granting	Tree’,
31
And	it	indicates	that	one	may	die	after	seven	days.
	
Whichever	of	these	[signs	of]	death	occur,

They	indicate	the	specific	time-frame	[of	impending	death].
Therefore,	upon	the	occurrence	of	such	[signs],	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
should	be	performed	three	times.
If	this	is	carried	out	[successfully],	untimely	death	will	be	averted.
One	should	[therefore]	exert	oneself	and	persevere	in	[applying]	the	practical
instructions,
As	[taught]	in	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of
Death
.
But	if	the	ritual	deception	does	not	take	effect,
Despite	being	performed	on	three	occasions,
Death	is	definite,	for	one’s	lifespan	is	at	its	end.
MISCELLANEOUS	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
32
Here	follows	the	presentation	of	the	miscellaneous	signs	of	death.
Regardless	of	whether	one	is	sick	or	healthy,
If	one	cannot	see	the	point	of	the	nose	with	the	eyes,
One	may	die	after	five	months.
If	one	cannot	see	the	tip	of	one’s	own	tongue,
One	may	die	after	three	days	even	if	one	is	not	sick.
If,	when	one	gazes	at	the	surface	of	a	clear	mirror,
One	cannot	see	with	one’s	left	eye,	one	may	die	after	seven	months.
[Usually],	when	one	breathes	into	the	palm	of	one’s	own	hand	[from	close
by],	it	will	feel	warm,
And	when	one	does	so	[from	a	distance]	it	will	feel	cold,
But	if	these	[sensations]	are	reversed,
One	should	know	that	one	might	die	after	ten	days.
If,	when	one	looks	for	one’s	reflection	in	a	vessel	filled	with	water,
No	reflections,	images,	or	the	like,	are	apparent,
This	too	is	a	sign	of	death.
If,	when	bathing,	water	does	not	cling	to	the	area	around	the	heart,
Or	if	the	water	dries	out	[quickly]	around	the	heart,	this	may	indicate	death.
It	is	[also]	said	that	if	no	sound	is	emitted	when	one	snaps	the	fingers,	this
may	indicate	death;
And	if	the	anklebones	protrude	from	the	legs,

It	is	said	that	one	may	die	after	one	month.
	
[Furthermore],	it	is	said	that	if	one	leaves	no	footprints	in	soft	earth,	this	may
indicate	death,
And	if	one	becomes	weaker	after	having	eaten	nutritious	food,
And	if	one’s	shadow	changes	[its	shape	unnaturally],	this	too	may	indicate
death.
	
When	lice	and	nits	[suddenly]	gather	or	leave,	this	may	indicate	death.
If	a	former	temperament,	peaceful	or	wrathful,	is	reversed,
And	if	a	former	pattern	of	behaviour,	good	or	bad,	changes,
These	too	are	signs	indicative	of	a	person’s	death.
If	one’s	image	reflected	in	water	or	in	a	mirror	lacks	a	head	or	limbs,
This	too	may	be	a	sign	of	death.
If	there	is	a	retraction	of	the	penis	and	protrusion	of	the	testicles,	or	vice	versa,
If	a	previously	unheard	pulmonary	wheezing	sound	occurs,
And	if	one	cannot	sense	the	smell	of	a	dying	butter	lamp,
These	are	said	to	be	signs	that	one	will	certainly	die	[imminently].
	
In	addition	to	such	signs,	the	following	may	also	occur:
A	turbid	confusion	and	darkening	of	normal	consciousness,
A	loss	of	one’s	former	appetite,
Embarrassment	and	incapacity	in	undertaking	virtuous	acts,
A	[restless]	urge	to	leave,	and	an	inability	to	stay	in	one	place,
Discomfort	in	bed	and	inability	to	fall	asleep,
Recurring	amnesia	and	disorientation,
Recurring	memories	of	one’s	former	kindred,	and	the	desire	to	be	with	them
[again],
Death	wishes	and	the	desire	to	commit	suicide,
The	desire	to	roam	and	travel	alone,	without	companions,
Inertia,	faintheartedness,	and	character	changes,
Poor	physique	and	the	convergence	of	many	different	illnesses,
Dreams	which	are	disturbed	and	recurringly	negative,
The	welling	up	of	powerful	mental	anxiety,
Impious	behaviour,	which	does	not	avoid	the	five	poisonous,	dissonant	mental
states,
Lack	of	clarity	and	loss	of	faith	in	the	[sublime]	instructions,

And	incontinence	or	constant	secretion	of	generative	fluids.
	
Such	are	the	[miscellaneous]	signs	that	death	is	near.
Examine	and	scrutinise	them	with	awareness!
Then,	[if	the	time	of	death	has	arrived],
The	transference	of	consciousness	should	be	performed!
33
SIGNS	OF	EXTREMELY	NEAR	DEATH
Now	follows	the	presentation	of	the	signs	of	extremely	near	death:
The	five	sense	faculties	dissolve	sequentially,
And	as	a	sign	of	this	[imminent]	demise	of	the	sense	faculties,
One	will	be	unable	to	digest	food	and	drink,	and	one	may	vomit.
Bodily	warmth	will	diminish,	the	neck	will	not	support	the	head,
And	one	will	feel	that	the	head	is	sinking	downwards.
	
Then	the	five	elements	will	dissolve	as	follows:
34
The	internal	earth	element	comprises	flesh	and	bone.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	earth	element,
The	body	will	grow	heavy,	and	its	skin	will	sag	towards	the	ground,
Whereupon,	as	an	internal	sign,	one	will	feel	that	the	body	is	sinking	into	the
earth.
Because	the	energy	of	earth	will	have	dissolved	into	water,
One	will	be	incapable	[of	supporting]	one’s	physical	form.
Bodily	strength	will	slip	away,	and	consciousness	will	become	clouded.
35
	
The	internal	water	element	comprises	blood	and	serum.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	water	element,
Saliva	and	nasal	mucus	will	be	secreted,
While	the	throat	and	the	tongue	will	become	dry.
Because	the	energy	of	water	will	have	dissolved	into	fire,
The	warmth	of	the	body	will	slip	away,
And	consciousness	will	oscillate	between	clarity	and	dullness.
36
	

The	internal	fire	element	comprises	warmth.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	fire	element,
The	eyes	will	roll	upwards,	and	one	will	no	longer	recognise	people.
Because	the	energy	of	fire	will	have	dissolved	into	wind,
The	warmth	[of	the	body]	will	converge.
37
	
The	internal	wind	element	comprises	breath.
As	an	indication	of	its	dissolution	into	the	external	wind	element,
The	breath	will	become	wheezy,	and	the	limbs	will	quiver.
As	an	internal	indication,	consciousness	will	become	turbulent,
While	mirage-like	flashing	and	fleeting	[visions]	will	arise,
And	[concurrently]	all	lice	and	nits	will	leave	the	body.
38
	
[Then],	 the	 red	 ‘generative	 essence’	 derived	 from	 one’s	 mother	 will	 rise
upwards,
And	the	phenomenon	called	‘redness’	will	occur,
Wherein	all	appearances	are	suffused	by	redness.
At	that	point,	appearances	will	dissolve	into	the	‘[subtle	mental	consciousness
of]	increasing	[redness]’,
And	the	forty	patterns	of	conceptual	thought	that	originate	from	attachment
will	cease.
39
	
[Then],	the	white	‘generative	essence’	derived	from	one’s	father	will	fall
downward,
And	the	phenomenon	called	‘whiteness’	will	occur,
Wherein	all	appearances	are	suffused	by	whiteness.
At	that	point,	the	‘increasing	[redness]’	will	dissolve	into	the	‘[subtle	mind	of]
attainment’,
And	 the	 thirty-three	 patterns	 of	 conceptual	 thought	 that	 originate	 from
aversion	will	cease.
	
[During	this	process,	each	exhalation	of]	breath	will	become	increasingly
protracted,
While	all	the	blood	of	the	body	will	converge	in	the	‘life	channel’,
40
And	then	a	single	drop	of	blood	will	form	at	the	heart-centre.

In	this	way,	the	phenomenon	called	‘blackness’	will	occur,
Engulfing	the	suffocating	mind	in	blackness,
And	one	will	experience	the	sensation	of	falling	into	darkness,	as	if	into	an
abyss.
At	 that	 point,	 ‘attainment’	 will	 dissolve	 into	 the	 ‘[subtle	 mind	 of]	 near
attainment’,
And	the	seven	patterns	of	conceptual	thought	that	originate	from	delusion	will
cease.
	
[During	this	process],	the	mouth	will	open,	and	the	eyes	will	roll	upwards,
[Exposing]	their	pale	underside.
External	appearances	[will	fade],	as	during	the	setting	of	the	sun,
And	[finally]	the	sense	faculties,	memory,	and	perceptions	will	all	cease,
Whereupon,	all	[external]	appearances	will	be	absorbed	into	blackness.
At	that	point,	the	[exhaled]	breath	will	extend	[from	the	body]	by	a	cubit,
And	[all]	internal	appearances	will	[also]	come	to	resemble	darkness.
	
Then,	the	blood	in	the	heart	will	form	two	drops,
The	head	will	stoop,
And	the	[exhaled]	breath	will	extend	[from	the	body]	by	an	arrow-length.
	
Following	this,	the	blood	in	the	centre	of	the	heart	will	form	three	drops,
And,	with	HIKA-like	gasps,	the	[exhaled]	breath	will	extend	[from	the	body]
by	a	double	arm-span.
41
[Then],	the	external	breath	will	cease,	and,	engulfed	by	blackness,	one	will
become	unconscious.
Then,	the	white	and	red	‘generative	essences’	will	meet	together	at	the	heart,
And,	as	this	occurs,	one	will	swoon	into	a	state	of	blissfulness.
Thus,	consciousness	dissolves	into	inner	radiance,
42
Engendering	the	experience	of	the	‘coemergent	delight’.
[At	this	point],	awareness	dissolves	into	actual	reality,	at	the	centre	of	the
heart,	[like	the	meeting	of]	mother	and	child.
43
[It	is	at	this	time	that]	the	inner	breath	will	[also]	cease,
44
And	the	vital	energy	and	mind	will	rest	in	the	central	channel.
	

[At	this	moment],	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	dawns	upon	all	sentient
beings,
And,	in	the	case	of	a	few	yogins	who	have	achieved	realisation,
At	this	moment,	the	inner	radiance	of	the	path	meets	[the	inner	radiance	of	the
ground],
45
Like	a	[meeting	of]	a	mother	and	child,
And	 [thus,	 now],	 instantaneously,	 in	 an	 ascending	 and	 core-penetrating
manner,
These	[yogins]	will	actualise	the	uncreated	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
And	through	the	Buddha-bodies	of	Perfect	Resource	and	Emanation,
They	will	perform	inestimable	actions	for	the	sake	of	all	beings.
[Thus],	the	three	buddha-bodies	will	be	spontaneously	present,
And	buddhahood	will	have	been	attained.
	
Because	of	this,	one	should	understand	the	significance	of	obtaining	a	human
body,
And	cherish	the	experiential	cultivation	of	the	profound	[sacred]	teachings.
For,	even	though	the	genuine	inner	radiance	[of	the	ground]	will	[always]
arise	[at	the	moment	of	death],
In	the	case	of	all	beings	who	have	not	[already]	realised	the	[inner	radiance	of
the	path],
It	will	not	be	recognised.
The	[past]	births	that	one	has	assumed	and	left	behind	are	countless	and
infinite,
And,	although	the	inner	radiance	has	indeed	arisen	an	indescribable	[number
of	times],
It	has	been	obscured	[again	and	again]	by	the	dense	[fog	of]	coemergent
ignorance,
And	[thereby],	one	has	come	to	wander	endlessly	through	cyclic	existence.
This	is	why	it	is	important	to	achieve	such	a	secure	level	[of	realisation	in	this
life].
[SIGNS	INDICATING	THE	PLACE	OF	SUBSEQUENT
REBIRTH]

At	the	moment,	[as	described	above],	when	the	outer	breath	is	about	to	cease,
Signs	will	also	occur	[which	indicate]	the	place	of	subsequent	rebirth.
If	[when	dying]	the	right	hand	quivers,	one	talks	nonsensically,
And	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	under	the	right	armpit,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	an	antigod.
If	nasal	mucous	and	vital	wind	flow	through	the	left	nostril,
And	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	left	eye,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	a	human	being.
If	animal	sounds	are	emitted	from	the	mouth,	urine	is	secreted	from	the
urethra,
And	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	genitals,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	an	animal.
If	the	skin	turns	yellowish	and	lustreless,
And	there	is	salivation,	accompanied	by	sensations	of	hunger,
While	reproductive	fluid	is	secreted,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	reborn	as	an	anguished	spirit.
If	the	right	leg	shakes,	defecation	takes	place,
Anger	is	felt,	and	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	soles	of	the	feet,
It	is	said	that	this	person	will	be	born	in	the	hells.
If	one	experiences	intense	pride,	bodily	warmth	recedes	from	the	ears,
And	consciousness	is	emitted	via	the	ears,
[This	indicates	that]	one	will	be	born	as	a	
yakṣa
.
46
	
If	good	circumstances	prevail	[at	the	time	of	death],
And	if	there	is	minimal	impairment	of	the	vital	organs,	and	clear	mindfulness,
And	if	one’s	spiritual	teacher	and	fellow	practitioners	gather	together,	with	an
inspired	perspective,
And	if	serum	and	other	signs	appear	at	the	crown	of	the	head,
And	consciousness	is	transferred	from	the	crown	of	the	head,
Then,	it	is	said	that	one	will	achieve	liberation,	or	take	birth	among	the	higher
realms.
47
Therefore,	it	is	most	important	[to	create]	the	right	circumstances	at	the	time
of	death.
	
Furthermore,	there	are	indications	and	signs	of	a	higher	or	lower	rebirth
That	arise	after	the	death	of	a	sentient	being.

These	relate	to	changes	occurring	in	the	sky,	which	should	be	examined	over
[an	appropriate]	number	of	days:
If	the	sky	turns	dark	brown,	or	vaporous	[clouds]	well	up,
Or	if	there	are	winds,	chilling	breezes,	blizzards	and	so	forth,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	hell
realms.
If	a	lustreless	mist	hangs	in	the	sky,	and	the	sun	and	moon	fade,
If	there	is	no	wind	or	breeze,	and	the	sun	is	obscured,
Or	if	there	are	traces	of	rain,	or	else	if	it	rains	in	the	evening,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	realms	of
anguished	spirits.
If	the	sky	turns	brownish,	and	there	is	unbroken	black	cloud,
Or	if	there	is	a	mist	and	an	unpleasantly	brown	sky,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	animal
realms.
If	the	clouds	in	the	sky	turn	yellowish	black	and	assume	terrifying	forms,
And	hurtle	fiercely	back	and	forth,	driven	by	the	wind,
Or	if	there	is	thunder	and	lightning,	and	the	sun	and	moon	become	invisible,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	antigod
realms.
If	the	sky	is	bright	and	the	sun	and	moon	are	clearly	visible,
[Or	the	atmosphere	is]	utterly	clear,	without	wind	or	breeze,
All	these	are	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	god
realms.
If	the	sky	is	bright	and	clear,	and	fine	white	silken	clouds	appear,
Or	if	the	sun	and	moon	are	encircled	by	aureoles	of	light,
All	these	are	the	indications	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	among	the	human
realms.
	
Whichever	of	the	above	indications	arise,
They	signify	that	the	[deceased]	will	be	born	in	one	or	other	of	the	six
[mundane]	realms.
These	[signs]	will	occur	either	two,	three,	or	seven	days	after	death,
As	it	is	explained	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Cremation	of	Corpses
.
48
	
The	indications	that	one	has	attained	the	three	buddha-bodies	with	a	pure

rebirth,
Or	that	one	has	attained	liberation	in	the	manner	of	the	sky-farers,
Are	explained	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Cremation	of	Corpses
,	and	in	the	
Liberation
by	Wearing
.
49
One	should	therefore	consult	these	sources	in	detail.
CONCLUSION
Since	living	beings	do	not	know	when	they	will	die,
These	signs	of	death	should	be	looked	for	again	and	again.
When	the	signs	occur,	indicating	that	one	is	certainly	to	die,
Then	one	should	renounce	whatever	possessions	one	has,
And	clearly	call	to	mind	the	spiritual	teacher,
One’s	fellow	practitioners,	assembled	around	one,	and	the	oral	teachings.
Especially,	one	should	prepare	to	apply	the	transference	[of	consciousness],
50
And	listen	to	and	reflect	on	the	teaching	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
.
51
	
[However],	when	the	external,	internal,	and	secret	signs	of	death	do	occur,
If	one	does	not	perform	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
,
52
One	will	incur	the	downfall	of	abandoning	the	assemblies	of	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,
Who	are	the	Conquerors,	present	within	one’s	own	body.
53
As	a	result,	one’s	commitments	will	degenerate,	and	one	will	proceed	to	the
hells.
It	is	said	that	this	is	even	more	negative	than	the	[five]	inexpiable	crimes.
Therefore	 one	 should	 diligently	 persevere	 in	 the	 practices	 of	 the	
Ritual
Deception	of	Death
.
[Furthermore],	if	consciousness	is	transferred	[too	soon],
When	[only]	one	or	other	of	the	external	or	internal	signs	of	death	is	present,
This	is	called	the	‘slaying	of	the	deities’.
One	must	not	allow	this	to	occur,	because	the	downfall	will	be	extremely
great.
But	if	all	the	signs	of	death	are	completely	present,	and	cannot	be	averted,

Then,	 and	 only	 then,	 should	 one	 apply	 the	 instructions	 of	 consciousness
transference.
It	is	said,	in	the	tantras,	with	regard	to	the	advantages	of	the	timely	application
of	consciousness	transference,
That	even	one	who	has	committed	an	inexpiable	crime
Will	proceed	to	higher	rebirths	and	blissful	states,
And	can	attain	liberation,	[through	the	timely	application	of	the	instructions
on	transference].
	
EMA!	I	have	here	presented	the	
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]
the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
,
Which	is	a	supporting	text	to	the	teaching	on	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
,
An	extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Pro	found	Sacred
Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened
Intention
.
O	yogins	of	posterity,	comprehend	this	as	it	is!
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
May	[this	teaching]	be	encountered	by	fortunate	beings,
Who	possess	a	[positive]	residue	of	past	actions,
And	who	are	intelligent,	faithful,	persevering,	and	compassionate.
May	[the	activities	associated	with	this	teaching],
The	
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	the	Visual	Indications	and
Signs	of	Death
,	never	be	exhausted
Until	cyclic	existence	has	been	emptied!
	
This	is	a	treasure-teaching	revealed	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa.
May	virtue	prevail!

9
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
CONTEXT
This	is	the	companion	text	to	the	previous	chapter	and	it	describes	the
practices	to	be	followed	in	the	event	that	definitive	signs	indicating	death
are	discerned.
The	general	consolidated	rite	described	in	this	chapter	follows	the
classical	 structure	 of	 many	
Vajrayāna
	 protective	 rituals.	 This
consolidated	rite,	and	similar	rituals,	are	commonly	performed	in	Tibetan
Buddhist	communities	today	by	practitioners,	both	for	their	own	benefit
and	for	the	benefit	of	others.
i
	On	the	other	hand,	the	specific	rites,	related
to	specific	signs,	are	again	idiosyncratic	and	are	not	commonly	practised.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception
of	Death
,
1
	[an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities:	A	Pro	found
Sacred	 Teaching,	 [entitled]	 Natural	 Liberation	 through	 [Recognition	 of]
Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	the	glorious	transcendent	one,	[Vajra]kumāra,	whose	face	frowns
with	wrath!
3
	
The	methods	by	which	death	can	be	averted	and	postponed	should	now	be
explained	in	order	that	living	beings	might	be	released	from	suffering,	and	in
order	 that	 all	 the	 unremitting	 and	 extremely	 bitter	 sufferings	 of	 death,	 [in
particular],	might	be	dispelled	by	Mahākāruṇika.
4
	For,	the	sufferings	of	all	such
beings	[who	are	afflicted	by	the	discomforts	associated	with	death]	may	be
completely	curtailed	[through	ritual	means].	It	is	the	case	that,	for	some	children
of	buddha	nature,	the	signs	of	death	will	arise,	[when	looked	for]	as	described	in
the	previous	chapter.	The	esoteric	instructions	for	averting	[the	signs	which

indicate]	the	swiftly	approaching	year	or	month	[of	death]	consist	of	both	the
general	consolidated	rite	and	specific	rites.
GENERAL	CONSOLIDATED	RITE	FOR	AVERTING	DEATH
The	general	rite	for	averting	death	is	applicable	in	cases	when	the	lifespan	is
threatened	by	obstacle-causing	forces	and	[imbalanced]	elemental	forces.	Now,
the	body	of	a	person	acts	as	a	supporting	frame	for	the	five	elements,	and	it
naturally	comprises	five	appendages,	
five	sense-organs,	five	solid	viscera,	five
hollow	viscera,	and	five	great	energy	channels.	In	each	of	these	[anatomical]
parts,	the	five	elements	circulate	in	a	clockwise	manner,
5
	and	the	cessation	of
life	can	occur	due	to	[external]	circumstances,	or	one	could	die	through	the
mingling	of	conflicting	internal	elements,	or	life	could	also	cease	through	the
agency	 of	 a	 severe	 obstacle-causing	 force.	 The	 [time	 of]	 death	 may	 be
ascertained	by	actually	observing	the	respective	signs	associated	with	these
[three	causes	of	death],	as	and	when	they	manifest.
Immediately	 following	 the	 initial	 experience	 of	 such	 [signs],	 one	 should
perform	the	[appropriate]	rites	for	averting	[death],	which	include	ceremonies,
services,	and	exorcisms.
In	this	regard,	[one	should	know	that]	of	the	twelve	months	of	the	year,	two
are	ruled	by	each	of	the	[five]	elements,	while	the	two	[remaining]	months	are
ruled	[by	all	five	elements]	in	common.	Also,	within	each	of	these	months	[of
the	year]	there	is	a	five-day	period	ruled	by	each	of	the	[five]	elements,	while	the
five	[remaining]	days	are	ruled	[by	all	five	elements]	in	common.	[The	signs	of
death]	 cannot	 be	 averted,	 however,	 when	 an	 [imbalanced]	 elemental	 or
malevolent	force	[completely]	controls	the	body.	Just	as,	for	example,	if	fire
breaks	out	in	a	tall	fortress,	it	is	more	easily	averted	while	it	is	first	confined
within	the	lower	storey,	but	should	it	reach	the	top	[of	the	fortress],	the	fire
cannot	be	extinguished.
A	person	in	whom	the	signs	[of	death]	have	manifested	should	first	make
preliminary	offerings	to	the	spiritual	teacher,	and	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels,
and	accumulate	as	much	merit	as	possible.	Then,	the	ritual	for	averting	[an
imbalance	in	the	elements]	should	be	effected	through	the	agency	of	the	wheels
and	seed-syllables	of	the	elements.	This	should	be	done	as	follows:	[First],	draw
a	series	of	wheels	[representing	the	elements]	on	Indian	paper	or	palm	leaf.	The

representation	of	the	[green]	wheel	of	the	wind	element
6
	should	depict	four
spokes	and	a	circumference,	with	five	YAṂ	syllables	inscribed,	one	on	each
spoke	and	one	at	the	centre,	and	with	the	vowels	and	consonants	[depicted]	on
the	outer	circumference.
7
	The	red	wheel	of	the	fire	element	should	be	similar	[in
design],	with	four	spokes	etc.,	but	inscribed	with	five	RAṂ	syllables,	placed	as
before,	and	the	vowels	and	consonants	on	its	circumference,	[all	placed]	as
before.	Similarly,	the	yellow	wheel	of	the	earth	element	should	be	depicted	with
five	LAṂ	syllables,	the	white	wheel	of	the	
water	element	with	five	KHAṂ
syllables,	and	the	azure	wheel	of	the	space	element	with	five	E	syllables.	[Then],
on	each	of	these	inscribed	wheels,	one	should	visualise	the	deities	who	embody
the	nature	of	these	elements,	corresponding	in	colour	to	their	respective	wheels.
8
Then	 one	 should	 make	 five	 offerings,	 [one]	 to	 [each	 of]	 these	 [deities],
confess	all	negativity,	and	pray	for	one’s	desired	purpose.	After	this,	recite	the
seed-syllables	 of	 the	 individual	 [deities]	 the	 appropriate	 number	 of	 times,
corresponding	to	the	age	of	the	person	in	years,	and	[visualise	that]	the	[seed-
syllables]	are	then	absorbed	into	the	[respective]	deities.
9
	Then	[each	of	the
depictions]	of	the	[elemental]	wheels	should	be	placed	inside	containers	made
from	two	small	bowls	of	dough,	which	are	sealed	together,	and	bound	with
threads	of	five	colours,	forming	[the	pattern	of]	a	cross.
In	addition,	a	dough	effigy	of	the	subject’s	human	form	should	be	prepared,
one	cubit	in	height.	The	dough	should	be	mixed	with	wood,	water,	fire,	earth,
and	the	breath	of	different	species	of	sentient	beings.
10
	[Depictions	of]	the
[same]	five	seed-syllables	should	then	be	inserted	into	the	five	[corresponding]
sense-organs	[of	this	effigy].
11
As	for	the	substances	to	be	used	for	the	ritual	deception	of	the	malevolent
forces	[which	cause	death],	create	substitutes,	which	may	be	made	either	of	red
minium	clay,	or	else	from	dough,	which	is	then	painted.	These	should	all	be
equal	finger-widths	in	size,	black,	red,	yellow,	white,	green	and	multicoloured,
12
corresponding	in	number	to	the	age	of	the	subject.	These	should	be	mixed	with
the	subject’s	grime,	clothing,	nasal	mucus,	saliva,	tears,	hair,	fingernails,	and	so
forth;	as	well	as	with	ground	jewels	or	precious	substances.	They	should	then	be
adorned	with	[five]	coloured	wool	threads	and	various	silks,	and	also	decorated
with	many	sorts	of	bird	feathers,	[which	are	indicative]	of	bad	omens.
13
	Each
[substitute]	should	then	have	a	torma-offering	[prepared],	corresponding	to	it	in
colour,	and	[it	should	be	surrounded	by]	a	number	of	dough	
chang-bu
	offerings,

equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.
Then,	consecrate	all	these	with	the	six	mantras	and	six	gestures,	and	repeat	the
following	words,	‘Take	them!	Take	them!	O	mighty	[malignant]	ones!	Your
craving!	Your	attachment!	Your	clinging!	Your	memories!	Your	grasping!	Your
thoughts!	Your	contact!	Let	go	of	them!	Be	pacified!	And	be	free!’
Then,	together	with	the	[bowls	containing	the	elemental]	wheels,	cast	[these
substitutes]	into	the	torrent	of	a	wide	river.	Death	will	thereby	be	averted	for	up
to	three	years.	It	is	best,	therefore,	if	this	rite	is	performed	once	every	three
years,	even	before	the	indications	[of	death]	have	occurred.
SPECIFIC	RITES	FOR	AVERTING	DEATH
I	bow	down	to	the	deity	Mahākāruṇika,
Who	is	a	sanctuary	of	great	bliss.
	
The	methods	employed	in	the	specific	rites	for	averting	death	are	now	presented.
[Ritual	Averting	of	Signs	of	Near	Death]
For	all	these	rites,	which	follow,	it	is	best	if	the	subject’s	own	spiritual	teacher
can	be	present,	or	alternatively	a	sympathetic	friend.	They	should	empower	the
five	sense-organs	[of	the	subject]	with	the	seed-syllables	of	the	elements.
14
Then,	in	cases	when	the	fingernails	become	lustreless,	[as	described	in	the
previous	chapter],	a	religious	feast	should	be	offered	to	seven	monks.	Donations
should	be	offered,	and	one	should	receive	the	[Buddhist]	vows,	wearing	yellow
clothes.	If	one	has	already	taken	these	vows,	one	should	retake	them.	Thereby,
[death]	will	be	averted.
Similarly,	in	cases	when	the	cornea	of	the	eyes	begins	to	fade,	small	terracotta
imprints	of	white	earth	should	be	moulded,	their	number	equalling	the	subject’s
own	age	in	years.	After	seven	circumambulations	[of	the	terracotta	imprints],
cast	these	into	a	lake	or	river,	and	then	[retreat],	taking	a	number	of	paces	equal
to	the	subject’s	age	in	years,	while	reciting	the	Heart-mantra	of	Dependent
Origination
15
	and	not	looking	back.
In	cases	when	the	hair	of	the	nape	of	the	neck	grows	upwards,	one	should

prepare	a	dough	with	black	seeds	and	[use	this	to]	make	a	substitute	effigy,	one
cubit	in	height.	Into	its	heart,	one	should	then	insert	a	number	of	crushed	berries,
equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years,	and	attach	a	label	bearing	the	subject’s	own
name.	The	hair	should	be	made	from	the	subject’s	cut	hair.	Blood	
should	be
drawn	from	the	subject’s	body,	and	smeared	on	its	face.	It	should	then	be
wrapped	in	the	subject’s	clothing	and	smeared	with	black	pigment.	Then,	at	one
hundred	and	twenty-one	paces	from	the	subject’s	own	dwelling,	one	should	dig	a
triangular	dark	pit,	and	recite	[RAṂ],	the	seed-syllable	of	the	element	fire,	a
number	of	times	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.	Then	repeat	the	following
words	three	times,	‘Black	demon!	Take	this	[effigy]!	This	is	important!	This	is
important!’	Then,	throw	it	into	the	pit,	defecate	upon	it,	cover	it	with	earth	and
run	away.	Then,	one	should	re-examine	[the	above	sign	of	death].	If	it	persists	as
before,	the	rite	will	not	have	been	effective	[and	need	not	be	repeated].	However,
there	is	no	doubt	that	if	other	[associated	signs]	have	not	been	[completely]
averted	by	a	single	performance	[of	the	rite],	they	will	be	successfully	averted
following	three	such	performances.
In	cases	when	the	indication	of	[protruding]	ankle	bones	appears,	one	should
face	westwards	towards	the	sun	when	it	is	close	to	setting,	and	remove	one’s
clothes.	Then	placing	a	dog’s	tail	under	you	and	some	excrement	in	a	heap	in
front,	one	should	eat	a	mouthful	and	bark	like	a	dog.	This	[rite]	should	be
repeated	three	times.
Also	in	cases	when	other	people	are	afflicted	by	illness:	if	the	roots	of	their
teeth	grow	grimy	and	black,	such	a	person	should	wear	a	goat’s	skin,	face	the
sunrise,	and	bleat	three	times	like	a	goat.	Similarly,	in	cases	when	the	nostrils	sag
inwards,	it	will	be	beneficial	if	one	visualises	the	syllable	A	on	the	tip	of	the
subject’s	nose,
16
	recites	the	syllable	A	twenty-one	times,	and	bathes	in	various
rivers.
In	cases	when	the	limbs	are	subject	to	repeated	spasms,	it	will	be	beneficial	if
one	draws	a	four-spoked	wheel	on	each	of	the	limbs	with	a	solution	of	shellac,
and	 bathes	 a	 number	 of	 times,	 equalling	 the	 subject’s	 age	 in	 years,	 in
[consecrated]	water	over	which	many	
dhāraṇ
ῑ
	mantras	have	been	recited.
In	cases	when	the	eyes	stare	fixedly,	one	should	prepare	a	bountiful	religious
feast	on	behalf	of	the	monastic	community;	and	hold	a	party	for	a	number	of
children,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.	One	should	also	wear	red	clothing.
In	cases	when	the	right	cheek	sags	inwards,	[for	the	rites	of	the	earth	element],
one	should	mould	a	number	of	small	terracotta	imprints,	equalling	the	subject’s
age	in	years.	For	the	rites	of	the	water	element	one	should	make	a	number	of

water	libations,	equalling	
the	subject’s	age	in	years;	for	the	rites	of	the	fire
element	one	should	make	a	number	of	burnt	offerings,	equalling	the	subject’s
age	in	years;	for	the	rites	of	the	wind	element,	one	should	erect	a	number	of
flags,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years;	and	for	the	rites	of	the	space	element,
one	should	recite	a	number	of	syllables	E,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.
Thereby,	there	is	no	doubt	that	[death]	will	be	ritually	deceived.
In	cases	when	the	breathing	becomes	agitated,	it	will	be	beneficial	and	[death]
will	be	averted	if	one	makes	a	concentrated	paste	of	molasses	over	which
[YAṂ],	the	seed-syllable	of	the	wind	element,	has	been	recited.
In	cases	when	the	nose	tilts	to	the	right	or	left,	one	should	visualise	a	white
syllable	HŪṂ	on	the	tip	of	the	nose.	In	cases	when	tears	flow	uncontrollably,
one	should	visualise	the	syllable	BHRŪṂ	on	the	subject’s	eyes.
17
	In	cases	when
the	left	cheek	sags	inwards,	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	KṢA	[on	the
cheek].
18
	In	cases	when	the	teeth	become	locked,	one	should	visualise	the
syllable	HŪṂ	[on	the	teeth].	If	a	black	spot	appears	on	the	tongue,	one	should
visualise	the	short	syllable	HŪṂ	[on	the	tongue].
19
	If	the	ears	lie	flat	[against
the	head],	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	MĀṂ	[on	the	ears].
20
	If	the	xiphoid
of	the	chest	is	sagging	inwards,	one	should	visualise	the	syllable	MŪṂ	[on	the
xiphoid].
21
	In	cases	when	the	pulse	of	the	carotid	arteries
22
	is	missing,	one
should	visualise	the	syllable	HŪṂ	[on	those	arteries].	These	visualised	syllables
should	be	recited	as	many	times	as	equals	the	subject’s	age	in	years;	and	they
should	also	be	drawn	[on	the	appropriate	point	of	the	body],	using	vermilion	and
scented	water.
[Ritual	Averting	of	the	Signs	of	Remote	Death]
Similarly,	 when	 an	 examination	 is	 made	 of	 one’s	 reflected	 image	 optically
projected	onto	the	sky:	if	the	symbolic	hand-held	implement	is	missing,	one
should	perform	one	hundred	and	eight	feast-offerings	on	behalf	of	one’s	spiritual
teacher.	If	the	right	hand	is	missing,	one	should	prepare	a	dough	effigy,	one	cubit
in	height,	using	seven	kinds	of	grain.	The	head	should	be	fashioned	to	resemble
an	open-jawed	lion,	and	a	number	of	gull	feathers	should	be	inserted	into	it,
equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.	The	effigy	should	then	be	carried	down	a
main	street	towards	a	royal	manor,	which	is	located	to	the	north.
In	cases	when	the	left	hand	is	missing,	one	should	place	the	fang	of	a	black-

striped	tiger	and	the	fang	of	a	black	dog	inside	a	weasel	skin.	On	top	of	that	one
should	place	a	dough	effigy,	kneaded	together	with	the	subject’s	own	urine,	and
then	ritually	expel	the	effigy	by	throwing	it	into	a	river.
In	cases	when	the	right	leg	is	missing	below	the	knee,	[death]	will	be	averted
if,	at	dusk	as	the	sun	is	setting,	one	offers	a	number	of	acacia	or	juniper	lamps,
equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years.
In	cases	when	the	left	leg	is	missing,	one	should	make	an	effigy	of	white
earth,	one	cubit	in	height,	and	insert	into	its	heart	a	birchwood	stick,	four	finger-
widths	 in	 length,	 marked	 with	 notches,	 equalling	 the	 subject’s	 own	 age	 in
number.	It	should	be	carried	off	at	daybreak,	and	left	in	an	empty	quadrangle.
In	cases	when	the	right	part	of	the	head	is	missing,	one	should	compound
various	kinds	of	inauspicious	earth	with	the	fruits	of	black	wood	trees,	and	[out
of	this	mixture]	make	a	black	amulet,	into	which	the	subject’s	own	hair	and
clothing	fragments	should	be	inserted,	along	with	a	label	made	from	mountain
willow	wood,	[inscribed]	with	the	names	of	the	twelve	[animal]	year-signs.	Then
the	amulet	should	be	sealed,	and	a	number	of	thorns	of	different	species	should
be	attached	to	its	upper	face.	If	one	can	find	as	many	differing	types	of	thorn	as
equals	the	subject’s	age	in	years	it	would	be	best.	Otherwise,	if	one	cannot	find
[that	many],	one	should	insert	as	many	[differing	types]	as	one	can	find.	Then	at
midnight,	one	should	put	on	black	clothing	and	carry	the	amulet	to	a	cemetery.
In	cases	when	the	left	part	of	the	head	is	missing,	one	should	make	a	dough
effigy	using	twenty-five	different	types	of	grain,	and	insert	[fragments	of]	human
bones,	horse	bones	and	dog	bones	into	its	heart.	Then,	one	should	wrap	the
effigy	in	the	subject’s	old	clothing,	and	at	twilight	on	the	eleventh	day	[of	the
lunar	month],	one	should	give	it	to	another	person	for	insertion	into	a	pit	[which
has	been	made]	eighty	paces	to	the	south.	At	that	time,	one	should	cry	out,
proclaiming	one’s	sorrows	three	times,	and	bury	the	effigy.	Thereupon,	[death]
will	be	averted.
In	cases	when	the	head	is	missing	above	the	neck,	one	should	make	a	number
of	burnt	offerings	using	thorn	bushes,	equalling	the	subject’s	age	in	years,	and
burn	 them	 in	 succession.	 While	 each	 of	 these	 is	 burning,	 the	 heart-mantra
syllable	of	fire	[RAṂ]	
should	be	recited,	for	a	number	of	times	equalling	the
subject’s	age	in	years.
In	cases	when	the	head	and	the	neck	are	missing,	one	should	blacken	one’s
body	with	burnt	charcoal,	and	bind	one’s	hair	up	on	the	crown	of	the	head.	Then,
on	a	piece	of	paper,	four	finger-widths	in	size,	one	should	write	the	subject’s	age
and	the	name	of	the	present	year,	and	around	this	in	the	four	cardinal	directions,

one	 should	 inscribe	 the	 seed-syllables	 of	 the	 four	 elements.	 This	 [paper
simulacrum]	should	then	be	attached	to	the	nose,	and	at	noon	on	the	ninth	day
[of	the	lunar	month],	one	should	run	in	each	of	the	four	directions,	shouting	out
uninterruptedly,	‘You	take	this!	You	take	this!’	Then	the	paper	should	be	buried
in	a	charnel	ground.
In	cases	when	the	upper	trunk	is	missing,	one	should	light	a	wood	fire,	and
burn	a	label	inscribed	with	the	names	of	the	twelve	[animal]	year-signs.	In	cases
when	the	lower	trunk	is	missing,	it	will	suffice	if	one	goes	to	a	charnel	ground,
and	uses	the	assorted	bones	one	finds	to	make	smoke.
In	cases	when	the	right	side	of	the	body	is	missing,	[one	should	recite	the
dhāraṇ
ῑ
	
mantra	of]	Uṣṇ
ῑ
ṣa[-vijayā],	as	many	times	as	equals	the	subject’s	age	in
years,	and	one	should	[mould]	a	number	of	small	terracotta	imprints,	equalling
the	subject’s	age	in	years.	In	cases	when	the	left	side	[of	the	body]	is	missing,
one	should	read	aloud	countless	
dhāraṇ
ῑ
	mantras,	and	wear	red	clothing.
[Ritual	Averting	of	Further	Signs	of	Near	Death]
In	cases	when	the	‘severing	of	the	bond	between	atmosphere	and	earth’	occurs,
one	should	read	aloud	the	extensive	scriptures,
23
	or	complete	a	number	of
virtuous	acts.
In	cases	when	the	‘fall	of	a	rider	on	a	white	lioness’	occurs,	it	will	be
beneficial	if	one	performs	as	many	maṇḍala	rituals	as	equals	the	subject’s	age	in
years.
If	the	‘rupturing	of	the	[Wish-granting]	Tree’	occurs,	one	should	know	the
cures	for	each	of	the	[ailments	affecting]	the	solid	and	hollow	viscera.
24
In	cases	when	urine	scum	appears	reddish	blue,
25
	one	should	fashion	a	dough
effigy	of	the	twelve	[animal]	year-signs,	with	their	elements,
26
	and	for	each
subsequent	change	in	the	colour	[of	the	
urine	scum],	one	should	make	a	single
terracotta	imprint,	a	single	water	libation,	a	single	‘substitute	effigy’	of	the
subject,	and	a	single	burnt	offering	of	birchwood.	Then,	at	sunrise,	one	should
carry	these	off	to	a	cemetery	in	the	north-east.
In	cases	when	[the	urine	vapour]	is	blackish	and	putrid,	one’s	purpose	will	be
achieved	 if	 one	 mixes	 powdered	 iron	 and	 copper	 with	 various	 grains,	 and
scatters	this	[mixture]	in	the	four	directions.
In	cases	when	the	vapour	is	red	and	spotted,	one	should	make	a	number	of

substitutes,	imbued	with	the	subject’s	own	body	odour,	equalling	the	subject’s
age	in	years,	and	attach	a	red	silk	flag	and	a	porcupine	quill	to	each.	[Death]	will
be	averted	if	one	carries	these	off,	together	with	assorted	bones,	to	a	main	road	in
the	east.
In	cases	when	one’s	excrement	has	no	vapour,	one	should	face	the	west	at	a
time	when	the	sun	is	at	its	peak,	and	inscribe	the	elemental	seed-syllables	on	the
skull	of	a	horse.	[Death]	will	then	be	averted	if	one	neighs	as	many	times	as
possible.
In	 cases	 when	 the	 humming	 sound	 [normally	 heard]	 when	 the	 ears	 [are
cupped]	is	absent,
27
	one	should	prepare	a	number	of	torma-offerings	of	various
foods,	equalling	one’s	age	in	years,	and	attach	a	label	to	each	of	these,	bearing
the	names	of	the	twelve	[animal	year-signs].	One’s	purpose	will	be	achieved	if
one	then	conveys	these	[torma-offerings]	to	the	foot	of	a	palm	tree.
28
In	cases	when	the	[sign	known	as]	‘[one-legged	Yavati]	arising	[as	an	enemy]
against	the	leaves	of	the	Wish-granting	Tree’	occurs,	one	will	be	liberated	[from
the	indications	of	death],	if	one	perseveres	in	the	accumulation	[of	merit]	and
engages	in	virtuous	activities.
[CONCLUSION]
After	the	rituals	have	been	performed	according	to	the	above	instructions,	one
should	look	again	[for	the	visual	indications	of	death].	If	the	nature	of	their
appearance	has	altered,	the	indications	will	undoubtedly	be	averted	if	the	rites
are	repeated	from	seven	to	twenty-one	times,	or	a	number	of	times	equalling	the
subject’s	age	in	years.
This	completes	the	esoteric	instruction	concerning	the	ritual	
aversion	of	death,
which	was	composed	by	the	master	Padmasambhava,	as	a	means	of	liberating
sentient	beings	from	their	sufferings.	May	it	be	encountered	by	one	of	worthy
past	actions!
	
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
This	is	a	treasure-teaching	revealed	by	the	treasure-finder	Karma	Lingpa.

10
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through
Recollection
CONTEXT
Practitioners	 of	 this	 cycle	 of	 teachings	 who	 commence	 with	 the
Preliminary	Practice
	(Chapter	1),	and	purify	all	their	negativity	and
obscurations,	generated	by	their	past	actions,	through	the	practice	of	the
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
,	the	
Hundredfold	Homage
	and
the	
Confession
	(Chapters	5-7),	and	who	also	experientially	cultivate	the
practices	described	in	the	
Introduction	to	Awareness
	
(Chapter	4),	will,	in
the	best	of	cases,	attain	liberation	from	cyclic	existence	in	this	very
lifetime.
However,	those	who	are	unable	to	realise	this	level	of	achievement
should	 implement	 the	 instructions	 on	 consciousness	 transference
described	in	this	chapter	at	the	time	of	their	own	death.
This	wonderful	practice	is	classed	among	the	few	that	do	not	require
previous	experience	of	Vajrayāna	meditational	practices	in	order	to	be
effective.	Once	guidance	has	been	received	from	a	qualified	spiritual
teacher,	the	practitioner	should	follow	the	course	of	training,	outlined	in
this	 chapter,	 until	 the	 signs	 of	 accomplishment	 arise.	 Then,	 the
practitioner	should	maintain	this	proficiency	throughout	his	or	her	life.
It	is	regarded	as	extremely	beneficial	if	those	that	are	accomplished	in
this	practice	perform	this	consciousness	transference	in	support	of	other
people	or	animals	when	they	are	dying.	This	should	be	begun	during	the
interval	between	the	cessation	of	the	outer	respiration	and	the	cessation
of	the	inner	respiration,	at	the	point	when	the	mind	and	body	separate,
and	can	be	continued	for	an	appropriate	period	after	death.
As	the	text	stresses,	at	the	time	of	the	practitioner’s	own	death,	it	is
critically	important	that	this	technique	is	only	actually	implemented	at
the	exact	moment	of	death.

Herein	is	contained	an	oral	instruction	entitled	
Consciousness	 Transference:
Natural	Liberation	[through	Recollection]
,
1
	which	relates	to	the	intermediate
state	of	the	time	of	death.	This	is	the	fourth	topic	in	the	
Guide	to	the	Six
Intermediate	States	according	to	the	Perfection	Stage
,
2
	which	is	an	extract	from
the	
Peaceful	and	Wrath	ful	Deities:	A	Pro	found	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
3
INTRODUCTION
This	
Consciousness	 Transference:	 Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Recollection
,
which	is	the	fourth	topic	[in	the	
Guide	to	the	Six	Intermediate	States	according
to	 the	 Perfection	 Stage
,	 and	 which	 specifically	 contains]	 guidance	 on	 the
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	will	[now]	be	presented.
4
This	
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection
	is
a	 powerful	 method,	 a	 means	 for	 attaining	 buddhahood	 which	 does	 not
[necessarily]	 require	 meditation.	 This	 oral	 instruction	 through	 which
buddhahood	can	be	attained	at	the	time	of	death	is	[therefore]	most	valuable	for
those	who	have	not	trained	in	the	cycle	of	Cutting	through	Resistance,	or	[in	the
meditations	of]	the	Illusory	Body,	Dream	Yoga,	and	Inner	Radiance,	and	have
[therefore]	not	realised	the	truth	of	the	four	modes	of	liberation.	In	particular,	[it
is	 valuable]	 for	 ordinary	 persons,	 officials,	 householders	 and	 distracted
individuals	who	have	had	no	time	to	meditate,	despite	having	received	those
[instructions].	That	is,	[it	is	valuable	to	all]	those	who	have	not	engaged	in
experiential	 cultivation,	 even	 though	 they	 may	 have	 obtained	 profound
teachings,	and	who,	[as	a	consequence],	may	die	in	an	ordinary	frame	of	
mind,
having	 left	 the	 instructions	 as	 [unrealised]	 words,	 or	 having	 left	 [their
relationship	to]	the	[sacred]	teachings	as	a	[mere]	theoretical	understanding.
Now,	anyone	who	is	born	is	subsequently	certain	to	die.	Yet	the	time	of	death
is	 unknown.	 Indeed,	 since	 one’s	 death	 might	 be	 imminent,	 one	 should	 be
constantly	alert	to	[the	signs	which	portend]	death.	In	accordance	with	the
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of
Death
,
5
	one	should	analyse	the	signs	indicative	of	remote	death,	the	signs
indicative	of	near	death,	the	signs	indicative	of	uncertain	death,	and	the	signs
indicative	of	inevitable	death.	One	should	also	persevere	with	[the	practices

contained	in]	the	
Ritual	Deception	of	Death
,	as	these	correspond	to	the	signs	of
death	which	might	appear.
6
	If,	on	the	other	hand,	one	were	to	perform	this
consciousness	transference,	either	when	the	signs	of	death	are	not	fully	present
or	even	when	the	signs	are	fully	present	but	without	having	[first]	practised	the
ritual	deception	of	death,	then	one	would,	in	effect,	incur	the	crime	of	slaying	a
deity,	and	the	crime	of	committing	suicide.	This	is	an	even	greater	misdeed	than
committing	[one	of	the	five]	inexpiable	crimes.	Thus,	it	is	essential	that	one
should	perform	the	general	and	specific	ritual	deceptions	of	death,	whichever	is
appropriate,	three	times	or	as	often	as	is	required,	in	accordance	with	the	
Natural
Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
.
7
	If,	despite	having
performed	the	[appropriate]	ritual	deception	of	death	on	three	occasions,	the
indications	of	death	are	unaltered,	this	demonstrates	that	death	is	certain	to
occur.	It	is	at	this	time	[only]	therefore	that	one	should	begin	to	engage	in	the
[actual	practice	of]	consciousness	transference.
Since	it	is	said	that	[this	practice	may	confer]	higher	rebirth	or	liberation	even
on	one	who	has	committed	the	five	inexpiable	crimes,	the	timely	application	of
consciousness	transference	can	be	of	extremely	great	benefit.
TRAINING	IN	CONSCIOUSNESS	TRANSFERENCE
[The	practice	of]	consciousness	transference	has	two	aspects:	[namely]	training
and	the	actual	application.
First,	with	regard	to	training:	just	as,	for	example,	when	a	man	faces	the
inevitability	of	the	arrival	of	an	external	foe,	before	his	enemy	approaches,	he
will	prepare	armour,	weapons,	and	arrows,	and	train	in	the	arts	[of	warfare],	but
only	don	[and	apply]	these	when	the	enemy	[actually]	arrives	and	strikes,	so,	in
this	context,	the	training	takes	place	before	the	indications	of	death	have	arisen.
Since	one	does	not	know	when	one	will	die,	training	should	be	undertaken	from
the	present	moment,	for	it	is	essential	that	[one	is	able]	to	complete	the	actual
application	[of	consciousness	transference]	successfully,	when	death	becomes
certain.
Now,	the	training	in	consciousness	transference	may	be	undertaken	[in	two
contexts]:	at	times	when	[general]	guidance	[on	preliminary	practices]	is	being
given,	or	when	specific	guidance	on	consciousness	transference	is	being	given,
whichever	is	appropriate.	
8

As	found	in	the	preliminary	practices	of	the	[general]	guidance,
9
	
one	should
reflect	upon	the	difficulty	of	obtaining	[a	human	form	endowed	with]	freedoms
and	 opportunities	 [conducive	 to	 practice],	 and	 [one	 should	 reflect	 on]	 the
sufferings	of	cyclic	existence,	and	develop	an	attitude	which	is	disillusioned	with
cyclic	existence	and	desirous	of	renunciation.	Furthermore,	even	though	one	has
obtained	[the	above	freedoms	and	opportunities],	which	are	difficult	to	obtain,
one	should	[always],	from	the	depths	of	one’s	heart,	remember	death,	which	is
never	far	away.
Then,	sitting	on	a	comfortable	seat	in	the	posture	of	the	bodhisattvas,	one
should,	in	the	following	manner,	close	the	orifices	[of	the	body	which	lead	to
rebirth]	within	cyclic	existence:
The	body	should	be	upright	and	erect.	The	hands	should	cover	the	knees,
forming	 the	 earth-touching	 gesture,
10
	 and	 the	 shoulders	 should	 be	 drawn
upwards.	Then,	in	one’s	own	heart	one	should	visualise	an	azure	blue	syllable
HŪṂ,	blazing	with	light,	from	which	a	single	syllable	HŪṂ	breaks	away	and
descends	to	the	rectum,	precisely	blocking	the	orifice	through	which	the	hells	are
entered.	Another	syllable	HŪṂ	breaks	away	and	descends	to	the	orifice	of
procreation,	thereby	blocking	the	entrance	to	[the	realm	of]	the	anguished	spirits.
Similarly,	another	syllable	HŪṂ	[breaks	away	and]	blocks	the	entrance	[to	the
world	of]	animals,	which	is	in	the	urethra,	while	yet	another	syllable	HŪṂ
moves	to	the	navel,	and	others	to	the	mouth,	the	nostrils,	the	eyes,	and	the	ears,
each	one	precisely	blocking	its	respective	orifice.
11
Then,	on	the	crown	of	the	head,	one	should	visualise	that	the	crown	fontanelle
is	blocked	by	a	downward-facing	white	syllable	HAṂ.
12
	[Further,	one	should
visualise]	the	central	channel,	in	the	middle	of	the	body,	straight	and	erect,	with	a
yellowish	white	lustre,	like	a	taut	air-filled	sheep’s	intestine,	with	its	lower
extremity	extending	below	the	navel,	and	its	upper	extremity	extending	to	the
crown	fontanelle.	At	the	lower	extremity	below	the	navel,	at	a	focal	point	where
the	three	[main]	channels	converge,
13
	one	should	visualise	a	brilliant	white
seminal	point,	which	is	the	essence	of	awareness,	radiant	and	clear,	breathing
rhythmically,	continuously	pulsating,	and	on	the	verge	of	ascending.
In	the	space	above	the	crown	of	the	head,	one	should	visualise	one’s	spiritual
teacher,	seated,	full	of	joy,	in	the	form	of	Vajradhara.	Then,	one’s	bodily	weight
should	 be	 [drawn	 in	 and]	 concentrated	 upwards,	 and	 the	 rectum	 forcefully
closed.	The	eyes	should	be	turned	upwards,	the	tongue	[lifted	to]	rest	along	the

upper	palate,	and	the	hands	firmly	placed	in	the	‘fist’	gesture,
14
	with	the	thumbs
pressing	down	on	the	bases	of	the	fourth	fingers.
[Then],	from	below	the	navel,	the	seminal	point	is	moved	forcefully	upwards,
and,	through	the	engagement	of	speech,	it	is	elevated	with	the	support	of	guttural
gasps	pronounced	as	‘HI-KA	HI-KA’.	Through	the	force	of	the	vital	energy
below,	the	seminal	point	is	unable	to	resist	being	accelerated	upwards	through
the	central	channel.	By	this	method,	it	is	moved	upwards,	with	seven	HI-KA
gasps,	to	the	navel.	Then,	with	a	further	seven	HI-KA	gasps	it	reaches	the	heart,
with	a	further	seven	it	reaches	the	throat,	and	with	a	further	seven	it	reaches	the
space	between	the	eyebrows.	Then,	uttering	HI-KA,	[a	final	time],	the	seminal
point	makes	contact	with	the	syllable	HAṂ	at	the	crown	fontanelle,	after	which
one	should	visualise	that	it	spins	downwards	again	and	comes	to	rest	below	the
navel	as	a	white	diffusion.	Rest	in	that	state	for	some	time.
By	simply	repeating	this	exercise	a	few	times,	signs	will	emerge	that	this
[training	in]	consciousness	transference	has	taken	effect:	a	sensation	of	warmth
will	well	up	at	the	crown	fontanelle,	and	there	will	be	sensations	of	prickliness,
irritation,	numbness,	and	swelling,	while	the	crown	of	the	head	will	seem	to
become	supple	and	numb,	and	serous	fluid,	blood,	and	so	forth	will	emerge	at
the	crown	fontanelle.	When	this	occurs,	the	spiritual	teacher	should	carefully
examine	the	crown	fontanelle:	a	peacock	feather	or	stalk	
of	grass	should	be
inserted	 [into	 the	 fontanelle]	 so	 that	 it	 settles	 into	 [the	 fontanelle].	 This
[insertion]	confirms	that	the	training	in	consciousness	transference	has	been
successfully	achieved.
If	 you	 do	 not	 stop	 at	 this	 point,	 your	 practice	 can	 limit	 your	 lifespan.
Therefore,	one	should	cease	the	visualisation	and	yogic	exercises,	and	the	crown
of	the	head	should	be	massaged	with	butter	or	grain-seed	oil.	If,	on	the	other
hand,	the	signs	do	not	appear,	[the	seminal	point]	should	be	moved	upwards
many	times	by	vigorous	effort	until	the	signs	eventually	do	emerge.
Furthermore,	swelling	may	occur	on	the	crown	of	the	head,	and	if	[the	seminal
point]	 remains	 localised	 at	 the	 crown	 fontanelle	 [and	 the	 fontanelle	 is	 not
breached],	 headaches	 and	 similar	 [uncomfortable	 sensations]	 will	 occur.
Therefore,	one	should	visualise	that	the	syllable	HAṂ	at	the	crown	fontanelle	is
opened	 up,	 and	 that	 the	 seminal	 point	 emerges	 vertically	 from	 the	 crown
fontanelle,	touches	the	feet	of	the	spiritual	teacher	[visualised	above],	and	then
descends	again	through	the	fontanelle	to	rest	motionless	below	the	navel.	By
repeating	this	exercise,	just	a	few	times,	the	crown	fontanelle	will	be	opened,
blood	or	serous	fluid	will	certainly	emerge,	and	the	blade	of	grass	can	then	be

inserted.
After	this,	it	is	very	important	that	the	crown	fontanelle	be	re-blocked	by	the
syllable	HAṂ,	for	not	doing	so	could	limit	your	lifespan.
Subsequently	[in	training],	when	manoeuvring	the	seminal	point	up	and	down
within	the	central	channel	without	the	HI-KA	breathing	and	yogic	exercises,	it
remains	very	important	to	keep	the	crown	fontanelle	blocked	with	the	syllable
HAṂ.
The	[training	in]	consciousness	transference	should	be	practised	in	the	above
manner.
However,	because	HI-KA	is	a	mantra	which	reduces	the	lifespan,	this	should
only	 be	 used	 until	 [training	 in]	 consciousness	 transference	 is	 successful.
Otherwise,	after	[the	training]	has	been	successful,	do	not	resort	to	the	HI-KA
breathing.	If,	on	account	of	excessive	exertion,	one	overdoes	[the	training	in]
consciousness	 transference,	 one	 will	 run	 the	 risk	 of	 lapsing	 into	 perpetual
unconsciousness.	 In	 such	 cases,	 and	 if	 the	 consciousness	 has	 risen	 too
precipitously,	and	one	experiences	vertigo	and	so	forth,	one	should	beat	the	soles
of	the	feet	with	the	fists	and	massage	the	crown	of	the	head.	Then,	while
focusing	intensely	on	the	visualisation	of	an	extremely	heavy	golden	stūpa	on
the	 soles	 of	 the	 feet,	 one	 should	
perform	 many	 yogic	 jumps,	 so	 that	 [the
consciousness]	is	becalmed.	These	essential	points	are	to	be	generally	observed
in	the	course	of	the	practical	training.
The	‘consciousness	transference	of	the	training	phase’	which	has	just	been
described	should	be	carefully	practised	while	one	is	in	good	health,	and	before
the	signs	of	death	emerge.	SAMAYA!
THE	ACTUAL	APPLICATION	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS
TRANSFERENCE	AT	THE	TIME	OF	DEATH
[The	Timing	and	Context]
Secondly,	 the	 application	 phase	 refers	 to	 the	 actual	 transference	 of
consciousness,	which	is	to	be	undertaken	when	the	indications	of	death	are
unequivocally	present	and	when,	even	after	performing	the	[appropriate]	ritual
deception	of	death	[practice]	on	three	occasions,	it	is	indicated	that	one	will	not
recover.	There	are	four	[modes	of	actual	consciousness	transference],	namely:

consciousness	 transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Reality;	 consciousness
transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource;	 consciousness
transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation;	 and	 the	 consciousness
transference	of	ordinary	persons.
Concerning	 these,	 it	 is	 said	 [in	 the	
Root	 Verses	 of	 the	 Six	 Intermediate
States
]:
15
	
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	[all]	attachment,	yearning	and	subjective	apprehension	in	every
respect,
I	must	undistractedly	enter	the	path,	on	which	the	oral	teachings	are	clearly
understood,
And	eject	my	own	awareness	into	the	uncreated	expanse	of	space.
	
Now,	when	the	signs	of	the	onset	of	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
are	provoked	by	fatal	illnesses,	at	this	time,	when	the	indications	of	death	are
completely	present,	there	are	oral	instructions	which	bring	clearly	to	mind	that
which	may	be	
obscured	during	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death.	[The
clarity	of	these	instructions]	is	likened	to	[the	clarity	of]	an	elegant	lady	looking
into	a	mirror.	These	[instructions]	are	twofold:	a	clarification	which	is	elucidated
by	another
16
	and	a	clarification	undertaken	by	oneself.
In	 the	 former	 context:	 regardless	 of	 whether	 or	 not	 one	 perceives	 the
unequivocal	presence	of	the	signs	of	[one’s	own	impending]	death,	these	signs
will	be	recognised	by	the	physician	and	by	the	nurses,	based	on	[their	knowledge
of]	 the	 behavioural	 changes	 which	 occur.
17
	 Nonetheless,	 if	 one’s	 own
mindfulness	remains	clear,	one	should	also	examine	the	indications	of	near	death
of	one’s	own	accord.	In	any	case,	when	[it	is	thus	ascertained	that]	one	is	dying,
an	invitation	should	be	sent	to	one’s	root	spiritual	teacher	if	he	or	she	lives
nearby,	and	all	one’s	possessions	should	be	offered	to	the	teacher,	without	even	a
single	instant	of	attachment.	If	one	remains	even	slightly	attached	[to	worldly
goods],	one	may	be	cast	into	inferior	existences,	as	recounted	in	the	story	of	the
monk	Barwasum.
18
If	an	individual	is	unable	to	make	such	offerings	in	actuality,	these	should	be
offered	 mentally,	 and	 thereby	 a	 complete	 state	 of	 renunciation	 should	 be
achieved.	In	particular,	one	should	not	leave	any	object	at	all	close	to	[the	dying
person]	which	could	give	rise	to	attachment	or	aversion.	This	is	the	sense	of	the

verse	‘Renouncing	[all]	attachment,	yearning	and	subjective	apprehension	in
every	respect.’	At	this	time,	renunciation	should	be	generated	stainlessly.	As	it	is
said	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
:
19
	
In	particular,	one	should	please	with	offerings	and	feasts
One’s	own	spiritual	teacher,	the	monastic	community,
And	the	field	of	accumulated	merits.
20
	
Once	the	spiritual	teacher	has	arrived,	one	should	confess	any	former	violations
or	breaches	of	the	commitments,	if	any;	and	make	amends	for	any	transgressions
or	downfalls	previously	committed.	If	one	holds	any	vows,	these	should	be
reaffirmed,	and	if	no	vows	are	held,	these	should	be	taken	on	the	basis	of	the
Rite	of	Going	for	Refuge
.
21
	Then,	if	one	has	had	previous	experience	in	[the
practice	 of]	 consciousness	 transference,	 one	 should	 assume	 the	 appropriate
bodily	posture,	and	the	visualisation	should	be	
repeatedly	elucidated	by	one’s
spiritual	teacher,	in	accordance	with	the	[specific	tradition]	of	consciousness
transference	one	formerly	practised.
22
	Thereupon,	it	should	take	effect.	As	an
indication	of	success,	as	soon	as	one	has	expired,	the	signs	that	this	transference
has	been	effective,	such	as	blood	or	serous	fluid	[appearing]	at	a	swelling	on	the
crown	of	the	head,	will	certainly	emerge.
If	these	signs	do	emerge,	there	will	be	no	need	to	elucidate	the	intermediate
states.	But	if	they	do	not	appear,	the	spiritual	teacher	should	place	his	or	her	lips
close	to	the	ear,	or	else	place	a	bamboo	reed	or	a	hollow	tube	of	paper	close	to
the	ear,	and	through	it	slowly	elucidate	the	verses	[describing]	the	intermediate
states	 in	 succession,	 starting	 with	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 reality	 or	 inner
radiance,	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	
Liberation	 by	 Hearing
.
23
	 If	 this	 is	 done
appropriately,	it	is	certain	that	[these	instructions]	will	be	effective.	[The	reason
for	their	effectiveness	can	be	illustrated	as	follows]:	If,	for	example,	a	powerful
king	 were	 to	 dispatch	 a	 message	 through	 a	 reliable	 person,	 it	 would	 be
impossible	for	that	person	to	forget	[the	message].	He	would	communicate	it
absolutely,	 fearing	 that	 royal	 reproach	 would	 ensue	 if	 he	 were	 to	 forget.
Similarly,	in	this	context,	too,	fearing	the	abyss	of	the	lower	existences,	one	will
certainly	retain	the	instructions	in	mind,	and	thereby	achieve	certainty	as	to	[the
nature]	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
If	one’s	spiritual	teacher	is	not	present,	the	elucidation	should	be	made	by	a

spiritual	friend	holding	the	same	teaching	lineage	[as	oneself],	or	else	by	a
fellow	spiritual	sibling	whose	commitments	have	not	been	dissipated,	and	whose
view	and	conduct	are	sympathetic.
It	is	said	in	the	
Tantra	of	the	Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
:
	
At	that	time,	the	oral	instructions	of	the	spiritual	teacher
Should	saturate	one’s	mental	continuum.
These	truths	should	be	repeatedly	elucidated.
The	elucidation	should	be	made	repeatedly	by	a	spiritual	teacher,	spiritual
friend,	or	by	a	fellow	spiritual	sibling.
	
Such	is	the	form	of	the	clarification	which	should	be	made	by	others	[who	are
caring	for	a	dying	person].
Secondly,	the	clarification	to	be	undertaken	by	oneself	[at	the	time	of	one’s
own	death]	is	applicable	in	cases	where	the	spiritual	
teacher	and	fellow	students
have	not	gathered	together,	or	where	one	dies	alone	in	a	hermitage,	or	when	one
already	has	a	refined	experience	[of	consciousness	transference]	and	does	not
require	an	elucidation	to	be	made	by	others.	In	such	cases,	one	should	bring
clearly	to	mind	the	practices	which	one	formerly	experientially	cultivated.
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality
Now,	if	one	is	a	person	who	has	some	understanding	of	inner	radiance,	who	has
cultivated	the	view	of	emptiness,	and	encountered	it	directly	in	[one’s	own]
awareness,	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	is	the
supreme	[method].
Thus,	when	this	is	undertaken,	one	should	first	ensure,	as	above,	that	one	is
completely	without	a	single	possession	which	could	generate	attachment	or
aversion.	If	one	is	capable,	one	should	secure	one’s	body	in	the	seven	postures
[of	Vairocana],	or	sit	upright.	If	this	is	not	possible,	one	should	lie	on	one’s	right
side,	with	the	head	pointing	north,	and	repeatedly	think:	‘Now	that	I	am	about	to
die,	how	fortunate	am	I	to	be	able	to	effect	the	transference	of	consciousness
based	on	a	profound	instruction	such	as	this,	while	in	the	three	realms	of	cyclic
existence	in	general	and	in	particular	in	this	degenerate	age.	So	today,	I	shall
now	recognise	the	inner	radiance	of	death	to	be	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	and
consequently	take	birth	as	an	inestimable	number	of	emanations,	in	order	to

guide	each	in	accord	with	his	or	her	needs.	I	must	act	on	behalf	of	sentient
beings	 until	 cyclic	 existence	 has	 been	 emptied!’	 In	 this	 way,	 generate	 the
altruistic	intention	[to	attain	enlightenment	for	the	benefit	of	others]	fervently
and	repeatedly.	Then,	one	should	think	undistractedly,	as	follows:	‘I	must	attend
to	[the	words	of]	my	spiritual	teacher,	and	must	[act]	in	accordance	with	the
content	of	the	profound	teachings	which	I	[formerly]	received.’	The	whole	point
is	that	one	should	not	be	distracted	from	a	state	in	which	the	oral	instructions	are
clearly	held	in	mind.
Then,	 without	 concocting	 thoughts,	 one	 should	 free	 oneself	 from	 the
[dualistic]	 framework	 of	 the	 object,	 which	 is	 to	 be	 transmigrated,	 and	 the
[subjective]	act	of	consciousness	transference.	Intrinsic	awareness	should	be
uncontrived	and	clear,	undistracted	
and	distinct,	stark	in	its	[coalescence	of]
radiance	and	emptiness.	Let	[this	experience]	remain	unmoving	for	a	prolonged
period.	If	one	expires	in	this	state,	the	mother	and	child	inner	radiances,	that	is	to
say	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	and	the	inner	radiance	of	the	path	which	is
the	focus	of	one’s	current	meditation,	will	encounter	each	other,	like	a	stream
meeting	the	main	river.	[Thus],	one	will	attain	the	uncreated	Buddha-body	of
Reality,	in	an	upward-moving	core-penetrating	manner;	and	liberation	will	be
instantaneous.	 This	 is	 called	 the	 ‘pure	 consciousness	 transference	 into	 the
Buddha-body	of	Reality’	because	those	who	have	highly	developed	experience
and	realisation	need	repeat	only	this,	again	and	again.	It	is	the	best	of	all	modes
of	consciousness	transference.
Now,	in	the	case	of	those	who	have	not	recognised	[intrinsic	awareness]	and
who	are	without	experience	and	realisation,	though	they	may	well	try	to	apply
this	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	[this	would	be
ineffectual].	It	would	be	[like	trying]	to	show	a	material	object	to	someone	who
has	been	blind	from	birth,	or	[like	trying]	to	point	out	a	[particular]	star	to	a	dog.
It	is	very	important,	therefore,	that	the	[method	of]	consciousness	transference
and	the	manner	of	its	clarification	correspond	to	the	mental	capacity	of	the
individual.
If,	however,	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	is
effected	in	the	above	manner,	as	an	‘outer	sign’,	the	sky	will	become	clear	and
unclouded;	and	as	an	‘inner	sign’,	the	body	will	glow	radiantly	and	its	lustre	will
not	fade	for	a	long	time.	The	‘secret	signs’	include	the	appearance	of	the	white
syllable	AṂ	and	the	azure	syllable	HŪṂ	[among	the	cremated	relics].
24
Such	is	[the	instruction	on]	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-
body	of	Reality.	SAMAYA!

Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
If	one	chiefly	practises	the	generation	stage	[of	meditation]	and	particularly	if
one	has	little	certainty	with	regard	to	[the	experience	of]	emptiness,	one	should
undertake	 the	 consciousness	 transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource.	If	 one	 is	capable	 of	 securing	one’s	 body	in	 an	 upright	position,
adopting	as	suggested	before	the	appropriate	bodily	posture,	then	one	should	sit
upright	
and	 bring	 clearly	 to	 mind	 the	 visualisations	 of	 consciousness
transference,	as	previously	practised	during	one’s	training.	In	particular,	one
should	clearly	visualise	above	the	crown	of	one’s	head,	upon	a	lotus,	sun	and
moon	cushion,	one’s	spiritual	teacher	[in	the	form	of]	the	Buddha-body	of
Perfect	Resource.	[The	teacher	may	be	visualised	as]	the	great	Vajradhara,	or
Vajrasattva,	Avalokiteśvara,	and	so	forth,	and	especially	as	one’s	own	particular
meditational	deity,	following	whichever	[practices	of]	the	generation	stage	one
prefers.	One	should	meditate	clearly	on	the	essence	of	intrinsic	awareness	as	a
white	seminal	point,	[situated]	below	the	navel	at	the	lower	extremity	of	the
central	channel	within	the	body;	or	alternatively,	[one	should	clearly	visualise
here]	the	seed-syllable	of	one’s	very	own	meditational	deity:	a	white	syllable
AḤ,	an	azure	syllable	HŪṂ,	a	red	syllable	HRĪḤ,	and	so	forth,	as	appropriate.
25
It	will	be	best	if	one	[also]	clearly	visualises	that	[each	of]	the	orifices	[of	one’s
body]	is	blocked	by	the	syllable	HŪṂ;	but	if	this	is	not	visualised,	one	should
focus	one’s	consciousness	single-pointedly	within	the	central	channel,	without
mentally	engaging	the	orifices.
Then,	one’s	bodily	weight	should	be	[drawn	in	and]	concentrated	upwards,
and	the	rectum	forcefully	closed.	The	eyes	should	be	turned	upwards,	and	the
tongue	[lifted	to]	rest	along	the	[upper]	palate.	The	lower	vital	energy	should	be
moved	upwards,	while	focusing	one’s	consciousness	within	the	central	channel.
Then,	in	conjunction	with	a	series	of	HI-KA	HI-KA	gasps,	[the	seminal	point]
should	be	moved	successively	upwards	until	it	reaches	the	crown	fontanelle.
There,	 it	 breaks	 open	 the	 orifice	 of	 the	 crown	 fontanelle,	 which	 had	 been
blocked	by	the	syllable	HAṂ,	and	shoots	upwards,	like	an	arrow,	blazing	with
white	light,	and	then	it	dissolves	into	the	heart	of	the	meditational	deity	[seated
above].	One’s	awareness	should	then	be	focused	upwards	into	the	heart	of	the
meditational	deity,	and	without	letting	it	descend,	it	should	be	repeatedly	drawn
in,	and	absorbed	[into	the	deity’s	heart].	Then,	finally,	[the	visualisation	of]	the
meditational	deity	should	also	be	dissolved	into	a	non-referential	state.	If	one’s

breath	 ceases	 while	 [resting]	 in	 that	 state,	 one	 will	 attain	 the	 status	 of	 an
awareness	 holder,	 inseparable	 from	 the	 meditational	 deity;	 and	 achieve
buddhahood	in	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
If	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
does	take	effect	in	the	above	manner,	as	an	‘outer	
sign’,	the	sky	will	be	filled
with	rainbows	and	light;	and	as	an	‘inner	sign’,	blood	or	serous	fluid	will	emerge
from	the	crown	fontanelle	at	the	top	of	the	head,	or	dew-like	drops,	swellings,
and	so	forth	will	also	appear.	The	‘secret	signs’	include	the	appearance	of	any
one	of	the	five	types	of	bone	relic,	and	the	appearance	of	[bone	relics]	shaped
like	the	physical	form	or	hand-implement	of	a	deity,	and	so	forth.
26
Such	 is	 the	 consciousness	 transference	 into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource.	SAMAYA!
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation
As	for	the	appropriate	bodily	posture,	one	should	lay	the	body	down	on	its	right
side,	since	[this	position]	will	facilitate	the	departure	of	the	vital	energy	from	the
left	nostril.	Then,	one	should	request	that	a	statue,	relief,	or	drawing	of	the
Buddha-body	of	 Emanation	 be	placed	 in	front	 of	 oneself.	This	 could	 be	 a
representation	of	the	Great	Sage	[Śākyamuni	Buddha],	the	King	of	Medicine
[Vaiḍūryaprabharāja],	Maitreya,	or	Padmasambhava	of	Oḍḍiyāna;	or	it	could	be
an	image	of	one’s	own	spiritual	teacher	or	spiritual	friend.	Offerings	should	be
extensively	arrayed	before	the	[image].	If	no	image	is	actually	present,	clearly
visualise	one,	and	make	mentally	imagined	offerings.
Then,	 all	 those	 present,	 oneself	 and	 others,	 should	 make	 the	 following
aspirational	prayer,	saying,	‘Now,	may	I,	consequent	on	my	death,	for	the	sake	of
all	sentient	beings,	take	birth	in	an	emanational	body;	and	may	this	be	of
extensive	 benefit	 to	 all	 living	 beings!	 May	 this	 emanational	 body	 also	 be
endowed	with	the	major	and	minor	marks,	and	may	there	be	no	obstacles	to	its
lifespan	and	enlightened	activity!	May	I	be	reborn	as	a	great	awareness	holder,
holding	the	lineage	of	the	buddhas	of	the	three	times!’
Mentally,	 too,	 one	 should	 retain	 this	 fervent	 aspiration	 [constantly],	 and
visualise	that	within	the	utterly	translucent	central	channel,	the	essence	of	one’s
awareness	is	located	in	a	triangle	below	the	navel,	in	the	form	of	a	white	seminal
point,	tinged	with	red,	which	is	glistening	and	concentrated,	and	on	the	verge	of
rising	upwards.	Immediately,	the	rectum	should	be	closed	and	drawn	in,	so	that

there	is	no	option	but	for	the	seminal	point	to	
be	forced	upwards	by	the	power	of
the	vital	energy	below.	Then,	by	means	of	HI-KA	HI-KA	gasps,	which	should	be
performed	to	the	best	of	one’s	ability,	[the	seminal	point]	should	be	moved
upwards,	and,	as	it	reaches	the	orifice	of	the	left	nostril,	the	[motion	of	one’s]
awareness	should	be	synchronised	with	[that	of	one’s]	respiration.	Then,	in	an
instant,	like	an	arrow	being	fired,	[one’s	awareness]	should	penetrate	the	heart	of
the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	which	is	before	one.	Let	the	vital	energy	and
awareness	 remain	 there,	 without	 reabsorbing	 them	 [into	 one’s	 body].	 This
exercise	should	be	repeated	until	one’s	consciousness	does	depart	[the	body].
Consequently,	[the	transference]	is	certain	to	take	effect.	Once	consciousness
does	depart	in	that	state,	it	is	certain	that	one	will	subsequently	take	birth	in	an
emanational	body	which	will	act	for	the	benefit	of	sentient	beings.
If	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	does
occur	in	the	above	way,	as	an	‘outer	sign’,	clouds	or	rainbows	will	appear	in	the
sky,	some	resembling	a	wish-granting	tree	or	unfurled	white	silk,	or	a	shower	of
flowers,	and	so	forth.	As	an	‘inner	sign’,	blood,	serous	fluid,	or	generative	fluid
will	emerge	from	the	left	nostril;	or	else	dew-like	drops,	and	so	forth	may
appear.	 The	 ‘secret	 signs’	 include	 the	 appearance	 of	 many	 small	 relics,	 a
complete	unbroken	skull,	and	[bones	in	the	shape	of]	the	hand-emblems	of
deities.
27
Such	is	the	consciousness	transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation.
SAMAYA!
Instantaneous	Consciousness	Transference
All	the	[above	methods	of	consciousness	transference	are	appropriate]	in	the
context	of	a	person	whose	death	is	gradual;	but	in	the	case	of	those	who	die
suddenly,	there	will	not	be	sufficient	time	to	engage	in	meditations,	such	as	those
[just	 described].	 In	 this	 case,	 therefore,	 the	 method	 of	 instantaneous
consciousness	transference	becomes	most	important.	Since	it	is	unknown	what
the	circumstances	of	one’s	death	will	be,	one	should,	from	this	very	moment,
alternate	 one’s	 training,	 sometimes	 practising	 the	 consciousness-transference
technique	of	the	training	phase,	[described	earlier],	and	sometimes	practising	the
instantaneous	consciousness	transference.
The	[practice]	should	be	undertaken	in	the	following	manner:	
One	should
establish	a	clear	and	mindful	resolution,	thinking,	‘If	I	die	suddenly,	my	mental

focus	should	be	directed	towards	the	crown	of	my	head!’	This	resolution	is
extremely	important.	It	is	similar,	for	example,	to	the	resolution	of	someone	who
thinks	that	one	should	get	up	and	leave	[home]	when	the	moon	rises	on	the
twenty-second	day	[of	the	lunar	month].	If	[this	mental	focus]	is	continuously
maintained	during	the	evening	of	the	[day	before],	one	will	[actually]	awaken
when	the	moon	rises,	just	after	midnight.	In	exactly	this	way,	from	this	very
moment	onwards,	one	should	practise	projecting	one’s	mental	focus	upwards	to
the	crown	of	the	head	whenever	strong	fear	arises.
Then,	when	‘sudden	death’	does	occur,	as	when	falling	straight	over	a	steep
precipice,	the	thought	will	arise,	‘I	am	dying!’	As	soon	as	this	happens,	it	would
be	best	if	one	were	to	fervently	recall	one’s	spiritual	teacher,	or	recall	one’s
particular	meditational	deity,	[as	being	present,	seated]	on	the	crown	of	one’s
head.	Even	if	there	is	not	sufficient	time	to	make	this	recollection,	it	is	essential
to	project	one’s	mental	focus	upwards	towards	the	crown	of	one’s	head.	The
reason	for	doing	so	is	that	even	[ordinarily]	now,	when	strong	fear	arises,	we
tend	to	cry	out,	‘O	father!	spiritual	teacher!’	[Similarly]	therefore,	at	the	moment
[of	sudden	death]	also,	it	is	certainly	possible	that	one	will	recollect	one’s
teacher,	 or	 [if	 one	 has	 trained	 in	 this	 practice]	 that	 one	 will	 focus	 one’s
awareness	at	the	crown	of	one’s	head	[instinctively].	This	is	the	most	profound
crucial	point.
Likewise,	were	one	to	be	engulfed	by	a	great	fire,	or	swiftly	carried	away	by	a
mighty	river,	or	struck	on	the	head	by	lightning,	or	pierced	by	an	arrow	through
the	 heart,	 one	 must	 immediately	 recollect	 one’s	 spiritual	 teacher,	 [as	 being
seated]	on	the	crown	of	the	head,	or	alternatively	one	must	[at	least]	direct	one’s
awareness	 to	 the	 crown	 of	 the	 head.	 This	 is	 called	 the	 ‘instantaneous
consciousness	transference’,	and	it	is	also	known	as	the	‘forceful	consciousness
transference’.	As	this	is	most	profound,	one	should	train	one’s	mind	assiduously
[in	this	technique].
Moreover,	it	is	said	that	at	times	when	ordinary	people	experience	strong
fears,	there	are	many	advantages	when	they	simply	cry	out	‘O	father!	spiritual
teacher!’	or	invoke	the	name	of	a	buddha,	saying,	‘O	Orgyan!’
28
	If	this	is	so,	the
benefits	 of	 [additionally]	 directing	 one’s	 mental	 focus	 towards	 the	 spiritual
teacher,	present	on	the	crown	of	the	head,	are	inconceivable.
There	are,	altogether,	nine	different	pathways	through	which	consciousness
transference	 can	 occur,	 and	 these	 are	 associated	 with	 persons	 of	 superior,
average,	 and	 inferior	 capacity.	 The	 aperture	 of	 the	 crown	 fontanelle	 is	 the
pathway	through	which	[consciousness]	departs	to	the	pure	[realm	of	the]	sky-

farers.	Given	this,	[it	is	said	that]	one	will	attain	liberation	if	awareness	exits
through	the	[crown	fontanelle].	Since	this	is	the	supreme	pathway,	it	is	extremely
important	that	one	trains	in	directing	one’s	mental	focus	towards	this	[aperture].
Furthermore,	if	consciousness	is	transferred	through	the	pathway	of	the	eyes,	[it
is	said	that]	one	will	be	born	as	a	universal	monarch,	and	if	it	is	transferred
through	the	left	nostril,	one	will	obtain	an	unimpaired	human	body.	These	are	the
three	optimum	apertures	[associated	with	those	of	superior	capacity].
One	will,	however,	be	born	as	a	
yakṣa
	if	[consciousness	is	transferred]	through
the	right	nostril,	or	as	a	god	of	the	world-system	of	form	if	[it	is	transferred]
through	the	ears,	and	as	a	god	of	the	world-system	of	desire	if	[it	is	transferred]
through	the	navel.	These	are	the	three	medial	apertures	[associated	with	those	of
average	capacity].	Lastly,	one	will	be	born	as	an	animal	if	[it	is	transferred]
through	the	urethra,	as	a	anguished	spirit	if	[it	is	transferred]	through	the	sexual
passage,
29
	and	as	a	hell	being	if	it	is	transferred	through	the	rectum.	These	are
the	three	inferior	apertures	[associated	with	those	of	inferior	capacity].	Given
that	there	are	such	very	great	consequential	differences	between	the	various
apertures	through	which	consciousness	transference	may	occur,	there	will	be
inestimable	benefits	in	directing	one’s	awareness	to	the	crown	of	the	head,	at	the
time	of	death.
Such	is	the	forceful	consciousness	transference.	SAMAYA!
Consciousness	Transference	of	Ordinary	Beings
In	the	case	of	those	who	have	not	realised	the	meaning	of	emptiness,	and	who	do
not	 know	 the	 significance	 of	 the	 generation	 and	 perfection	 stages	 [of
meditation],	it	is	the	consciousness	transference	of	ordinary	beings	which	should
be	applied	as	follows:	The	head	[of	the	dying	person]	should	point	north,	with
the	body	lying	down	on	the	right	side.	A	spiritual	teacher	or	fellow	practitioner
should	then	remind	[the	dying	person]	to	pay	attention,	and	if	health	permits,	he
or	she	should	be	encouraged	to	take	refuge,	to	
cultivate	an	altruistic	intention,
and	to	confess	negativity.	Then,	the	teacher	should	confer	the	vows	of	the
Buddhist	laity,	and	if	there	is	time,	the	empowerments	of	the	way	of	secret
mantras	should	be	conferred.	Consequently,	by	dying	with	a	positive	momentum
of	 past	 actions,	 the	 individual	 who	 has	 [just	 received]	 these	 untainted
commitments	and	vows,	with	respect	to	the	nature	of	reality,
30
	will	be	liberated
from	inferior	existences,	and	there	will	be	inestimable	advantages.

In	the	case	of	a	person	who	cannot	do	even	that,	one	should	slowly	call	out	the
name	[of	the	dying	one],	saying,	‘Lord	Mahākāruṇika	is	present	on	the	crown	of
your	head!	Be	reverential!’	One	should	stroke	the	crown	of	his	or	her	head	and
gently	pull	the	hair	above	the	crown	fontanelle.	Thereby,	the	consciousness	will
[be	encouraged	to]	exit	from	the	crown	fontanelle.
In	 the	 case	 of	 those	 who	 cannot	 do	 even	 that,	 and	 whose	 capacity	 is
indistinguishable	from	that	of	animals,	one	should	repeat	the	words,	many	times,
‘Homage	to	Buddha	Ratnaketu!’,	directing	these	[words]	towards	the	head	[of
the	dying	person].	As	a	consequence,	they	will	certainly	be	liberated	from
[rebirth	in]	the	inferior	existences,	because,	when	in	the	past	this	buddha	made
his	aspirational	prayer,	he	did	so,	saying,	‘May	all	who	hear	my	name	be
liberated	from	[rebirth	in]	the	inferior	existences!’	Alternatively,	if	one	calls	out
the	name	of	the	[Medicine]	Buddha	Bhaiṣajyaguru	Vaiḍūryaprabharāja,	it	is	said
that	just	by	hearing	his	name,	[the	dying	person]	will	be	protected	from	the
sufferings	 of	 inferior	 existences.	 Similarly,	 one	 may	 call	 out	 the	 name	 of
whichever	buddha	one	may	know,	and	recite	whichever	blessed	heart-mantra	one
may	know,	such	as	the	Six-syllable	Mantra.
In	particular,	if	one	has	at	hand	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing
,
31
	
one	should	read
this	aloud,	and	also	recite	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
,
32
	repeating	whichever
aspirational	prayers	one	may	know.	Since	the	positive	momentum	of	[the	dying
person’s]	past	actions	can	thereby	be	secured,	this	will	be	most	advantageous.	In
the	worst	cases,	it	is	said	that	simply	by	dying	with	the	body	lying	down	on	the
right	side	and	the	head	pointing	north,	[that	person]	will	not	proceed	into	inferior
existences.
CONCLUSION
In	summary,	since	it	is	essential	that	all	the	advantages	[that	accrue	from]
practising	the	teachings	should	converge	at	the	time	of	death,	it	is	extremely
important	to	become	skilled	[during	one’s	lifetime]	in	the	process	of	dying.
[This	completes]	the	
Guide	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death
entitled	
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection
.
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!

11
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
CONTEXT
Traditionally,	the	procedures	followed	when	a	lama	visits	a	dying	or
deceased	person	are	intricate	and	prolonged,	and	will	vary	depending	on
whether	the	person	is	about	to	die,	has	just	recently	died,	or	has	been
dead	for	some	days.
When	a	person	is	approaching	death,	it	is	customary	for	the	relatives
or	close	friends	to	seek	the	assistance	of	a	fully	qualified	lama.	The	lama
should	be	motivated	by	a	sincere	compassion	for	all	sentient	beings	and
should	 have	 mastered	 in	 his	 own	 mental	 continuum	 the	 direct
experiential	 cultivation	 of	 the	 dying	 processes,	 as	 well	 as	 the
consciousness	transference	practices.
It	 is	 very	 important	 that	 when	 coming	 in	 to	 the	 household,	 the
attending	lama	is	concentrated	on	the	motivation	to	free	the	dying	person
from	the	sufferings	of	cyclic	existence.	Very	often	the	mere	presence	of
an	 accomplished	 lama	 can	 create	 a	 solid	 sense	 of	 calm	 and
purposefulness,	which	inspires	both	the	dying	person	and	family.
The	formal	practice	begins	with	the	attending	lama	taking	refuge	in	the
Buddha,	 the	 sacred	 teachings,	 and	 the	 ideal	 spiritual	 community,	 on
behalf	 of	 the	 dying	 person	 and	 all	 other	 sentient	 beings,	 including
himself.	At	this	point,	the	lama	should	visualise	in	the	space	in	front	of
himself	 images	 of	 the	 three	 objects	 of	 refuge	 -	 the	 Buddha,	 sacred
teachings	and	ideal	community	-	forming	a	tree,	whose	branches	like
billowing	clouds	in	the	sky	are	adorned	by	buddhas,	bodhisattvas	and	the
spiritual	masters	of	the	lineage.	Then	he	should	visualise	that	the	dying
person,	surrounded	by	all	sentient	beings,	takes	refuge	by	reciting	the
following	verses	three	times:
	
I	take	refuge	from	now	until	enlightenment,

In	the	Buddha,	the	[sacred]	teachings	and	the	supreme	assembly.
Through	the	merit	of	practising	generosity	and	the	other	[perfections],
May	I	attain	buddhahood	for	the	sake	of	[all]	living	beings.
	
Maintaining	this	same	visualisation,	the	lama	should	slowly	recite	with	full
concentration	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations,	based	on	the	cultivation	of
loving	kindness,	compassion,	sympathetic	joy,	and	equanimity.
	
May	all	sentient	beings	be	endowed	with	happiness!
May	they	all	be	separated	from	suffering	and	its	causes!
May	they	be	endowed	with	joy,	free	from	suffering!
May	they	abide	in	equanimity,	free	from	attraction	and	aversion!
	
Up	to	this	point,	the	preliminary	procedures	are	common	to	all	the	traditions	of
Tibetan	Buddhism.	Next,	the	lama	should	enter	into	the	practice	of	the	
Natural
Liberation	 of	 Habitual	 Tendencies
,	 as	 presented	 in	 Chapter	 5.	 During	 the
practice	of	the	initial	ten-branched	prayer	(contained	in	Chapter	5),	the	refuge
tree	 is	 still	 visualised	 in	 the	 space	 in	 front.	 As	 the	 ten-branched	 prayer	 is
concluded	the	lama	visualises	that	all	the	objects	of	refuge	melt	into	light	and
then	 gradually	 dissolve	 into	 the	 crowns	 of	 each	 of	 the	 attending	 persons,
including	the	dying	person	and	himself.	So	at	this	point	the	body,	speech	and
mind	of	all	enlightened	beings,	the	objects	of	refuge,	become	indivisible	from
the	lama’s	own	body,	speech,	and	mind	and	those	of	all	others	present.	Like
water	poured	into	water	they	become	inseparably	one	in	nature.	In	this	way,	it	is
visualised	that	all	those	present	are	brought	under	the	protection	of	the	Three
Precious	Jewels.
Then,	like	a	bubble	emerging	from	water,	the	lama	visualises	himself	arising
out	of	emptiness	in	the	form	of	Vajrasattva	and	he	continues	with	the	practice	of
the	
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
.	Once	this	practice	is	complete,
extensive	 mental	 offerings	 should	 then	 be	 made	 to	 all	 the	 buddhas	 and
bodhisattvas	and	the	lama	should	slowly	recite	three	or	seven	times	the	short
prayer	 entitled	 an	
Aspirational	 Prayer	 [Calling]	 to	 the	 Buddhas	 and
Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	(see	Chapter	12),	followed	by	the	accompanying
aspirational	 prayers.	 This	 is	 often	 followed	 by	 a	 series	 of	 more	 general
recitations	from	the	Buddhist	canon,	including	the	
Sūtra	of	the	Three	
Heaps
(
Triskandhakasūtra
,	T	284),	dedicated	to	the	Thirty-five	Buddhas	of	Confession,

the	recitation	of	the	names	of	the	thousand	buddhas	of	this	aeon,	following	the
arrangement	of	Sākyaśrī	of	Kashmir,	entitled	
Ornate	Garland	of	the	Auspicious
Aeon
	(
Bhadrakalpikālaṃkāramālā
	
,	T	1169),	together	with	the	recitation	of	the
mantras	 given	 in	 the	
Tantra	 of	 the	 Purification	 of	 All	 Lower	 Destinies
(
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra
	
,	T	483).	Just	to	hear	these	names	is	said	to
make	a	powerful	impact	on	the	consciousness	of	the	dying	person.
At	this	point,	the	lama	has	to	be	very	observant	of	the	dying	person.	Excessive
preoccupation	with	the	completion	of	these	recitations	may	distract	him	from
seizing	the	moment	when	the	dying	person’s	consciousness	actually	leaves	the
body.	 Carefully	 observing	 the	 signs	 of	 death,	 as	 indicated	 in	 the	
Natural
Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
(Chapter	8),	just	before	the	person	passes	away,	the	lama	should	immediately
begin	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	(the	first	part
of	the	present	chapter),	even	if	the	previous	recitations	are	unfinished.	In	certain
circumstances,	mouth	to	mouth	resuscitation	might	be	given,	in	accordance	with
the	 cycle	 entitled	
Eight	 Transmitted	 Precepts:	 Oral	 Transmission	 of	 the
Awareness	Holder
	(
bKa’-brgyad	rig-’dzin	zhal-lung
),	which	was	revealed	by	the
Fifth	Dalai	Lama,	or	an	equivalent	text.	This	may	maintain	life	for	a	short	period
while	final	guidance	is	given.
Accordingly,	the	dying	one	should	be	guided	through	the	processes	of	the
dissolution	of	the	elements	(as	set	out	in	Chapter	8),	before	continuing	with	the
introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	as	set	out	in	this
chapter.	Usually,	the	dying	person	is	addressed	by	name,	or	by	the	expression
‘child	of	buddha	nature’	(
rigs-kyi	bu
).	One	who	is	worthy	of	great	respect	is
addressed	by	an	expression	such	as	‘venerable	one’,	‘spiritual	master’,	‘teacher’,
or	‘your	ladyship’	and	so	forth.	If	it	is	someone	from	whom	the	attending	lama
has	personally	received	teaching,	he	may	use	the	expression	‘lord	of	the	refuge’
(
skyabs-mgon
)	 or	 ‘great	 lama’	 (
bla-chen
),	 and	 so	 forth.	 There	 are	 different
modes	of	address.
The	voice	of	the	lama	who	calls	out	to	the	dying	person	should	be	very
melodious,	so	that	merely	upon	hearing	the	sound	of	the	instructions	the	person
feels	soothed,	elevated	and	attracted.
Following	the	outer	dissolution	of	the	four	elements	and	the	inner	dissolution
of	the	processes	of	conceptual	thought	into	redness,	whiteness	and	blackness,	the
lama	should	recite	the	verses	describing	
the	moment	of	the	arising	of	the	inner
radiance	of	the	ground.	These	words	of	introduction	should	be	read	aloud	three
times.	If	the	dying	person	fails	to	recognise	the	first	inner	radiance	and	swoons

into	unconsciousness,	the	lama	should	proceed	with	the	introduction	to	the
second	inner	radiance	followed	by	the	introduction	to	the	emergence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
Once	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	has	been	completed,
the	attending	lama	should	closely	observe	the	body	of	the	deceased	and	seek	to
determine	 whether	 he	 or	 she	 has	 attained	 liberation	 from	 rebirth	 in	 cyclic
existence.	If	emancipation	has	occurred,	the	body	will	take	on	a	certain	glow,
and	while	being	in	its	presence,	one	will	experience	a	sensation	of	happiness.
The	body	will	not	smell.	It	will	look	just	like	a	living	person	who	is	sleeping.
These	are	signs	that	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	has	attained	liberation.	In
addition,	external	environmental	signs	may	arise,	as	described	in	Chapter	8,
including	distinctive	cloud	formations	and	rainbows.	If	the	deceased	is	a	realised
yogin,	monk	or	layperson	who	has	gained	complete	freedom	at	the	time	of	death,
then	the	attending	lama	may	hear	the	sound	of	chanting	and	the	music	of	sacred
instruments,	 such	 as	 the	 skull	 drum	 or	 bell.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 if	 the
consciousness	of	the	deceased	has	not	been	emancipated,	the	complexion	of	the
deceased	will	become	disquieting	and	may	inspire	a	sense	of	fear	when	it	is
seen.	 The	 face	 will	 become	 grey	 and	 dusty,	 and	 the	 body	 will	 begin	 to
decompose	very	quickly.
If	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	does	not	attain	liberation	while	in	the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	the	mental	body	assumed	by	the	deceased	will	then
immediately	 fall	 into	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 rebirth,	 at	 which	 time,	 the
attending	lama	should	recite	the	introduction	to	that	phase,	as	presented	in	the
latter	part	of	this	chapter.
Importantly,	these	introductions	to	the	three	intermediate	states	of	the	time	of
death,	reality	and	rebirth	should	be	supplemented,	if	appropriate,	by	the	practice
of	the	transference	of	consciousness,	as	presented	in	Chapter	10.	If	the	internal
and	 external	 signs	 are	 very	 good,	 consciousness	 transference	 will	 not	 be
necessary	and	could	even	be	potentially	harmful.
The	attending	lama	must	take	great	care	as	to	if	and	when	consciousness
transference	should	be	practised.	It	is	not	only	highly	
realised	spiritual	masters
who	remain	in	meditation	during	these	intermediate	states,	but	even	ordinary
men,	women,	and	children	may	have	achieved	a	settled	state	of	mind,	enabling
them	to	remain	in	peaceful	and	deep	meditation	after	death.	If	consciousness
transference	were	performed	in	such	cases,	the	deceased	would	be	disturbed.
Moreover,	since	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	has	a	tendency	to	leave	the
body	from	whichever	point	it	is	touched,	the	relatives,	loved	ones	and	the

attending	lama	should	refrain	from	touching	the	body	or	only	tap	the	crown
fontanelle	in	order	to	induce	the	consciousness	to	leave	from	that	point.
If	 the	 attending	 lama	 decides	 that	 consciousness	 transference	 is	 the
appropriate	course	of	action,	it	should	be	repeated	many	times	until	certain
indications	occur,	such	as	the	emergence	of	mucus	or	blood	from	both	nostrils.
Further,	in	order	to	induce	the	consciousness	to	leave	the	body	via	the	crown,
which	is	the	optimum	gateway	for	the	transference	to	take	effect,	the	means	of
preventing	the	consciousness	from	leaving	through	other	orifices	as	described	in
Chapter	10	should	be	applied.	This	is	facilitated	by	visualising	that	the	nine
orifices	of	the	body	are	each	sealed	by	a	single	HŪṂ	syllable,	thus	forcing	the
consciousness	to	exit	via	the	crown	fontanelle.
In	any	event,	if	the	attending	lama	feels	that	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased
has	become	confused	and	trapped,	or	if	the	corpse	begins	to	decompose	and	lose
its	radiance,	then	consciousness	transference	should	be	immediately	performed.
Once	the	introductions	to	the	intermediate	states	of	the	time	of	death,	reality,
and	rebirth	have	been	concluded,	the	attending	lama	should	then	recite:	the
Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher
	
(Chapter	2),	the	
Natural	Liberation
of	Habitual	Tendencies
	(Chapter	5),	the	
Hundredfold	Homage
	(Chapter	6),	the
Confession
	(Chapter	7),	and	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing
	(Chapter	14).
At	this	juncture	the	attending	lama	may	read	certain	general	prayers	not
included	within	the	present	cycle,	such	as	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	for	Good
Conduct
	(
Bodhisattvapraṇidhānarāja
,	T	1095),	one	of	the	many	versions	of	the
Aspirational	Prayer	for	Rebirth	in	Sukhāvat
ῑ
	
(contained	in	
bDe-smon	Phyogs-
sgrigs
),	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	of	Maitreya
	
(
Maitreyapraṇidhāna
,	T	1096),	and
the	 final	 chapter	 of	 the	
Introduction	 to	 the	 Conduct	 of	 a	 Bodhisattva
(
Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra
,	T	3871),	which	concerns	the	dedication	of	merit	on
behalf	of	all	sentient	beings.
These	may	be	followed	by	a	further	recitation	of	prayers	specific	to	the
present	cycle,	namely	the:	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(Chapter	3)
and	the	
Aspirational	Prayers
	(Chapter	12).
This	completes	the	summary	of	the	process	through	which	the	attending	lama
tends	directly	to	the	consciousness	of	the	dying	person	and	the	deceased.

PART	ONE
An	Elucidation	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death	and
of	the	Appearance	of	the	Peaceful	Deities	in	the	Intermediate
State	of	Reality
Herein	is	contained	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,
1
	an	elucidation	of	the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	[which	is	an	extract]	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	the	spiritual	teachers,	[embodiment	of]	the	Three	Buddha-
bodies:
To	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	Infinite	Light,	Amitābha;
To	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Lotus
Deities;
And	to	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation,	Padmākara,	protector	of	beings.
	
This	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	the	skilful	means	which	liberates	yogins	of
average	 ability	 during	 the	 intermediate	 states,	 has	 three	 parts,	 namely:	 the
introduction,	the	main	subject	matter	[of	the	text]	and	the	conclusion.
INTRODUCTION
[All	aspirants]	should	experientially	cultivate	the	steps	of	guidance,	
3
	which	are
the	means	by	which	corporeal	beings	can	achieve	liberation.	Those	of	highest
acumen	 should	 certainly	 attain	 liberation	 [in	 their	 lifetime]	 through	 [the
application	of]	that	guidance.	But	if	liberation	does	not	occur	thereby,	[yogins]
should	 implement,	 during	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 the	 time	 of	 death,	 [the
appropriate	 procedure	 outlined	 in]	 the	
Consciousness	 Transference:	 Natural
Liberation	through	Recollection.
4
	Yogins	of	average	
ability	should	certainly	be

liberated	by	that.	If	liberation	is	not	effected	by	the	[application	of	consciousness
transference],	then	[the	recitation	of]	the	following	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
should	be	persistently	made	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
First,	therefore,	yogins	should	examine	the	signs	of	death	in	accordance	with
the	 text	 entitled	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 [Recognition	 of]	 the	 Visual
Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
,	also	known	as	the	
Mirror	which	Clarifies	the
Visible	 Indications	 of	 Death.
5
	 Thereupon,	 when	 the	 [inner]	 signs	 of	 the
processes	 of	 death	 are	 definitively	 and	 completely	 present,	 [the	 appropriate
procedure	as	outlined	in]	the	
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation
through	Recollection
	should	be	applied.	Thus,	if	this	transference	is	effective,
there	will	be	no	need	to	read	aloud	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
.
If,	however,	the	transference	is	ineffective,	this	
Liberation	by	Hearing
	should
be	read	aloud	with	correct	pronunciation	and	clear	diction,	close	to	the	corpse.	If
the	corpse	is	not	present,	one	should	sit	next	to	the	bed	or	seat	of	the	deceased.
Then,	having	invoked	the	power	of	truth
6
	and	summoned	the	consciousness	[of
the	deceased],
7
	one	should	imagine	him	or	her	to	be	listening	in	one’s	presence
and	read	aloud	[this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
].	At	this	time	the	relatives	and
close	friends	should	[be	advised	to]	show	restraint	because,	at	this	stage,	it	is	not
appropriate	to	cry	or	dramatically	express	one’s	grief.
8
If	the	deceased’s	body	is	present,	then	during	the	interval	which	follows	the
ceasing	of	respiration,
9
	this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
	should	be	read	aloud
by	 a	 spiritual	 teacher,	 or	 by	 a	 spiritual	 sibling,	 sincere	 [practitioner],	 or	 a
sympathetic	friend,	placing	the	lips	[close]	to	the	ear	[of	the	deceased],	without
actually	touching.
10
THE	MAIN	SUBJECT	MATTER
Now	follows	the	actual	exegesis	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
:
First,	one	should	make	extensive	offerings	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels.
11
	If
these	are	unobtainable,	one	should	make	offerings	by	arraying	whatever	one	has
as	a	support	for	visualisation	and	mentally	emanating	an	immeasurable	[quantity
of	offerings].	Then	
one	should	recite,	three	or	seven	times,	the	
Aspirational
Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
.	After	this,	one
should	melodiously	recite	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of

the	 Intermediate	 States
,	 the	
Aspirational	 Prayer	 which	 Rescues	 from	 the
Dangerous	Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States
	and	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	[Six]
Intermediate	States
.
12
Thereafter,	this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
	is	to	be	read	aloud	seven	or	three
times,	or	[as	many	times]	as	the	circumstances	permit.
[The	main	subject	matter	of	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
]	comprises	three
sections:	the	introduction	to	inner	radiance	during	the	intermediate	state	of	the
time	of	death,
13
	the	great	elucidation	which	introduces	the	intermediate	state	of
reality
14
	and	a	teaching	on	the	means	for	obstructing	the	entrance	to	the	womb
during	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
15
	
Introduction	to	Inner	Radiance	in	the	Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death
	
This	 introduction	 is	 made	 on	 behalf	 of	 those	 individuals	 who	 have	 good
understanding,	but	do	not	yet	have	recognition	[of	inner	radiance],	as	well	as
those	who	have	gained	recognition	but	have	little	familiarity,	and	all	ordinary
persons	 who	 have	 received	 little	 experiential	 guidance.	 By	 means	 of	 [this
introduction],	 such	 beings	 will,	 upon	 recognising	 the	 inner	 radiance	 of	 the
ground,	attain	the	uncreated	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	in	an	ascending	and	core-
penetrating	manner,	without	[experiencing]	the	intermediate	states.
	
Introduction	to	the	Inner	Radiance	of	the	Ground
	
As	for	the	method	of	making	[this	introduction],	it	is	best	if	the	root	spiritual
teacher	from	whom	[the	dying	person]	personally	received	guidance	can	be
present.	 If	 he	 cannot	 be	 present,	 then	 a	 spiritual	 sibling	 with	 identical
commitments
16
	[should	be	called	upon],	or	if	none	of	these	can	be	present,	then
a	spiritual	friend	holding	the	same	lineage
17
	should	attend;	or	if	none	of	these	at
all	 can	 be	 present,	 someone	 who	 knows	 how	 to	 read	 aloud	 with	 correct
pronunciation	and	clear	diction	should	recite	[the	introductions]	many	times.
Thereby,	[the	dying	person]	will	remember	
that	which	had	[formerly]	been
introduced	by	his	or	her	spiritual	teacher	and	immediately	afterwards,	being	set
face	to	face	with	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground,	will	undoubtedly	attain
liberation.
Concerning	 the	 time	 for	 making	 [this	 introduction]:	 after	 respiration	 has

ceased,	the	vital	energy	is	absorbed	into	the	channel	of	pristine	cognition
18
	and
the	consciousness	[of	the	deceased]	naturally	arises	as	a	non-conceptual	inner
radiance.	Later,	the	vital	energy	will	be	reversed	and	escape	into	the	right	and
left	channels	and,	as	a	result,	the	appearances	of	the	[subsequent]	intermediate
state	 [of	 reality]	 will	 arise	 suddenly.	 Therefore,	 [the	 introduction	 to	 inner
radiance	at	the	time	of	death]	should	be	made	before	[the	vital	energy]	has
escaped	into	the	right	and	left	channels.	[Generally],	the	length	of	time	during
which	the	inner	breath	remains	present	within	the	central	channel	is	just	about
the	time	taken	to	eat	a	meal.
19
As	regards	the	actual	mode	of	making	[this	introduction],	it	is	best	if	the
consciousness	transference	is	effected	at	that	moment	when	the	respiration	is
about	to	cease.	If	it	is	not,	one	should	say	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(call	the	name	of	the	dying	person)
,	the	time	has
now	come	for	you	to	seek	a	path.	As	soon	as	your	respiration	ceases,	[the
luminosity]	known	as	the	‘inner	radiance	of	the	first	intermediate	state’,
20
which	 your	 spiritual	 teacher	 formerly	 introduced	 to	 you,	 will	 arise.
[Immediately]	your	respiration	ceases,	all	phenomena	will	become	empty
	
and
utterly	naked	like	space.	[At	the	same	time],	a	naked	awareness	will	arise,	not
extraneous	[to	yourself],	but	radiant,	empty	and	without	horizon	or	centre.	At
that	moment,	you	should	personally	recognise	this	intrinsic	nature	and	rest	in	the
state	of	that	[experience].	I	too	will	introduce	it	[to	you]	at	that	time.
21
	
These	words	should	be	spoken	audibly	many	times,	impressing	them	on	the
mind	[of	the	dying	person]	until	respiration	ceases.
Then,	when	the	respiration	is	on	the	point	of	ceasing,	one	should	lay	[the
dying	person]	on	the	right	side,	in	the	posture	of	the	lion,	and	take	the	pulse.
22
Once	the	throbbing	of	the	two	carotid	arteries	has	stopped,	they	should	be	firmly
pressed	[at	their	pressure	points	on	the	neck].
23
	Then	the	vital	energy,	having
entered	the	central	
channel,	cannot	reverse	[and	escape]	and	it	will	certainly
emerge	through	the	crown	fontanelle.
24
	The	introduction	should	continue	to	be
made	at	this	time.
This	phase	in	the	process	of	death	is	called:	‘the	inner	radiance	of	reality
during	 the	 first	 intermediate	 state’.	 It	 is	 the	 unique	 and	 incontrovertible
enlightened	intention	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	which	arises	in	the	minds

of	all	living	beings.	[At	the	moment	of	death],	this	coincides	with	the	period
when	the	vital	energy	is	absorbed	into	the	central	channel,	after	respiration	has
ceased	and	before	the	ceasing	of	the	inner	breath.	Ordinary	people	describe	this
state	as	‘loss	of	consciousness’.
25
The	duration	of	this	[experience	of	inner	radiance]	is	uncertain,	[for	it	depends
on]	the	health	and	characteristics	of	[the	dying	person’s]	physical	constitution,
and	on	the	degree	of	[his	or	her	proficiency	in	the	practices	related	to]	the	vital
energies	and	channels.	For	those	who	have	considerable	practical	experience,	or
those	who	have	achieved	stability	in	the	practice	of	calm	abiding,	or	those	who
have	healthy	energy	channels,	this	experience	can	be	prolonged.
26
	In	striving	to
make	this	introduction,	therefore,	one	should	remind	[the	deceased]	repeatedly
[by	giving	the	instruction	as	above	and	below],	until	serous	fluid	emerges	from
the	apertures	of	the	sense-organs.
27
	For	those	persons	of	great	negativity	and
those	classes	of	beings	with	unhealthy	channels	this	phase	lasts	no	longer	than	a
single	snapping	of	the	fingers.	In	others,	it	may	last	for	as	long	as	it	takes	to	eat	a
meal.	 However,	 as	 most	 sūtras	 and	 tantras	 state	 that	 the	 period	 of
unconsciousness	[following	the	moment	of	death]	may	last	for	three	and	a	half
days,	generally	one	should	persevere	for	that	length	of	time,	in	making	this
introduction	to	inner	radiance.
As	for	the	way	in	which	this	introduction	is	made:	if	capable,	the	dying	person
should	facilitate	this	of	his	or	her	own	accord	by	projecting	a	formerly	cultivated
[spiritual	practice	into	the	intermediate	state].	If	[the	individual]	is	not	capable	of
this,	then	a	spiritual	teacher,	a	student,	or	a	spiritual	sibling	who	was	a	close
friend,	should	stay	nearby	and	clearly	remind	[the	dying	person]	of	the	signs	[of
death]	in	their	correct	sequence,	saying:
	
Now,	the	sign	of	the	dissolution	of	earth	into	water	is	present,	of	water	into	fire,
fire	into	wind,	wind	into	consciousness,
	
and	so	forth	[as	set	down	in	the	text
entitled	
Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications	and
Signs	of	Death
	].
28
Then,	when	the	sequence	of	the	signs	is	almost	complete,	[the	attendant]
should	encourage	the	dying	person	to	cultivate	the	following	altruistic	intention,
beginning	with	the	words:	‘
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature!
’	or,	if	[the	dying	person]
is	a	spiritual	teacher,	the	attendant	should	gently	say	the	following	words	into	the
ear:
	

O,	Venerable	One!	I	beg	you	not	to	be	distracted	from	the	cultivation	of	an
altruistic	intention!
	
If	[the	dying	person]	is	a	spiritual	sibling	or	anyone	else,	[the	attendant]	should
call	to	him	or	her	by	name	and	say	the	following	words:
	
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 that	 which	 is	 called	 death	 has	 now	 arrived.
Therefore	 you	 should	 adopt	 an	 altruistic	 motivation	 and	 concentrate	 your
thinking	as	follows:	‘I	have	arrived	at	the	time	of	death,	so	now,	relying	on	the
process	of	death,	I	will	single-mindedly	cultivate	an	altruistic	intention.	I	will
meditate	on	the	generation	of	loving	kindness,	compassion	and	an	altruistic
intention	to	attain	enlightenment.	For	the	benefit	of	all	sentient	beings,	who	are
as	limitless	as	space,	I	must	attain	perfect	buddhahood.’	And	in	particular,	[you
should	 think]:	 ‘At	 this	 moment,	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 all	 sentient	 beings,	 I	 must
recognise	[the	time	of]	death	as	[the	arising	of]	inner	radiance,	the	Buddha-
body	 of	 Reality,	 and	 while	 in	 that	 state,	 I	 must	 attain	 the	 supreme
accomplishment	of	the	Great	Seal,	and	thereby	act	for	the	good	of	all	sentient
beings.	 If	 I	 do	 not	 achieve	 this	 accomplishment,	 then,	 recognising	 the
intermediate	state	as	it	is,	I	will	actualise	the	coalescent	Buddha-body	of	the
Great	Seal	during	the	intermediate	state,	and	thereby,	manifesting	in	order	to
instruct	each	in	accordance	with	his	or	her	needs,	I	will	act	for	the	benefit	of	all
sentient	beings,	who	are	as	limitless	as	space.’	Without	giving	up	the	focus	on
cultivating	an	altruistic	intention,	in	the	above	way,	recollect	the	meditative
experiences	which	you	formerly	developed	on	the	basis	of	the	oral	teachings.
	
Those	words	should	be	clearly	spoken,	while	placing	the	lips	close	to	the	ear	[of
the	dying	person].	Without	permitting	the	attention	
[of	the	dying	one]	to	be
distracted	even	for	an	instant,	[the	attendant]	should	remind	him	or	her	of	past
meditative	experiences.
Then,	when	the	respiration	has	ceased,	and	the	two	carotid	arteries	have	been
firmly	pressed,	remind	[the	dying	person]	with	the	following	words,	if	the
individual	was	a	spiritual	teacher	or	a	spiritual	friend	greater	than	oneself:
	
Venerable	One!	The	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	is	now	arisen	before	you.
Recognise	it,	and	concentrate	directly	on	its	experiential	cultivation.
	

For	all	others,	one	should	introduce	[the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground],	with	the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(call	the	name	of	the	individual)	
listen!	Pure	inner
radiance,	reality	itself,	is	now	arising	before	you.	Recognise	it!	O,	Child	of
Buddha	Nature,	this	radiant	essence	that	is	now	your	conscious	awareness	is	a
brilliant	emptiness.	It	is	beyond	substance,	beyond	characteristics	and	beyond
colour,	completely	empty	of	inherent	existence	in	any	respect	whatsoever.	This	is
the	female	Buddha	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	essential	nature	of	reality.	The	essence	of
your	 own	 conscious	 awareness	 is	 emptiness.	 Yet,	 this	 is	 not	 a	 vacuous	 or
nihilistic	emptiness;	this,	your	very	own	conscious	awareness,	is	unimpededly
radiant,	brilliant	and	vibrant.	This	[conscious	awareness]	is	the	male	Buddha
Samantabhadra.	The	utterly	indivisible	presence	of	these	two:	the	essence	of
your	own	awareness,	which	is	empty,	without	inherent	existence	with	respect	to
any	substance	whatsoever,	and	your	own	conscious	awareness,	which	is	vibrant
and	radiantly	present,	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.	This	intrinsic	awareness,
manifest	 in	 a	 great	 mass	 of	 light,	 in	 which	 radiance	 and	 emptiness	 are
indivisible,	is	the	buddha	[nature]	of	unchanging	light,	beyond	birth	or	death.
Just	to	recognise	this	is	enough!	If	you	recognise	this	brilliant	essence	of	your
own	conscious	awareness	to	be	the	buddha	[nature],	then	to	gaze	into	intrinsic
awareness	is	to	abide	in	the	enlightened	intention	of	all	the	buddhas.
	
This	 introduction	 should	 be	 made	 three	 or	 seven	 times,	 with	 correct
pronunciation	and	clear	diction.	Accordingly,	[the	deceased]	will	firstly	recollect
[the	teachings]	as	they	had	been	formerly	given	by	
his	or	her	teacher,	and
secondly	be	introduced	to	inner	radiance	as	a	naked	natural	awareness.	And	then,
thirdly,	having	recognised	this,	he	or	she	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
beyond	conjunction	or	disjunction,	and	certainly	achieve	liberation.	Recognition
of	the	‘first	inner	radiance’	[of	the	ground]	takes	place	in	this	way.
	
[Introduction	to	the	Inner	Radiance	of	the	Path]
	
If,	however,	it	is	feared	that	[the	deceased]	has	not	recognised	the	first	inner
radiance,	the	so-called	‘second	inner	radiance’	[of	the	path]	will	arise.	[Again,	it
is	said	that	this	second	inner	radiance]	lasts	a	little	more	than	the	time	it	takes	to
eat	a	meal,	after	the	respiration	has	ceased.	Specifically,	it	arises	once	the	vital
energy	has	escaped	into	the	right	or	left	channel,	whichever	is	appropriate

depending	on	the	positive	and	negative	past	actions	[of	the	deceased],	and	once
the	vital	energy	has	emerged	through	one	of	the	orifices	of	the	body.
29
	When
this	occurs,	the	consciousness	suddenly	becomes	awake	and	lucid.
Although	it	is	said	that	this	second	inner	radiance	also	lasts	[approximately]
for	as	long	as	it	takes	to	eat	a	meal,	this	actually	depends,	as	before,	on	whether
or	not	the	energy	channels	are	healthy	and	whether	or	not	[the	individual]	has	or
lacks	meditative	experience.
Now,	at	this	point,	the	consciousness	emerges	from	the	body	and,	[initially],
the	individual	may	not	know	whether	or	not	he	or	she	has	died.	The	relatives	are
seen	as	before,	and	their	cries	of	sorrow	can	be	heard.	During	this	period,	before
the	harsh	and	bewildering	experiences	related	to	past	actions	have	arisen,	and
before	 the	 terrifying	 experiences	 related	 to	 Yama	 have	 occurred,	 the	 oral
teaching	should	be	given.
30
	This	[oral	teaching]	concerns	both	the	perfection
stage	and	the	generation	stage	[of	meditation].	If	[the	deceased]	was	engaged	in
[the	practices	of]	the	perfection	stage,	one	should	call	to	him	or	her	three	times,
by	name,	and	repeat	the	above	[instruction,	which	is]	the	introduction	to	inner
radiance.	If	[the	deceased]	was	engaged	in	[the	practices	of]	the	generation	stage,
one	 should	 read	 aloud	 the	 formal	 description	 of	 the	 individual’s	 chosen
meditational	deity	as	set	down	in	the	corresponding	meditative	cycle.	Then
remind	him	or	her	with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature!	Meditate	on	this,	your	meditational	deity.	Do	not	be
distracted!	Concentrate	intently	on	your	meditational	deity!	Meditate	that	[the
deity]	appears,	and	yet	is	without	inherent	existence,	like	[the	reflection	of]	the
moon	in	water.	Do	not	meditate	on	the	deity	as	a	solid	corporeal	form!
31
	
If	 [the	 deceased]	 was	 an	 ordinary	 person,	 without	 a	 specific	 practice,	 then
preface	the	introduction	with	the	following	words:
	
Meditate	on	the	Lord	of	Great	Compassion!
32
	
By	means	of	such	an	introduction,	there	is	no	doubt	that	even	those	who	have
not	recognised	[the	nature	of]	the	intermediate	state	will	do	so.
This,	[the	above]	precise	reminder,	should	be	given	by	a	spiritual	teacher	or
sibling	to	those	who,	despite	having	already	received	this	introduction	from	a

spiritual	 teacher	 while	 they	 were	 alive,	 have	 an	 undeveloped	 meditative
experience,	 and	 accordingly	 will	 not	 recognise	 the	 intermediate	 state	 by
themselves.	Equally,	this	instruction	is	of	crucial	importance	in	the	case	of	those
who,	despite	their	meditative	experience,	are	bewildered	by	serious	illness	at	the
moment	of	death	and	therefore	cannot	recall	[their	past	meditative	experiences];
and	finally,	it	is	particularly	necessary	in	the	case	of	those	beings	who,	despite
their	former	meditative	experience,	are	at	risk	of	falling	into	lower	existences	as
a	result	of	having	broken	their	vows	and	having	failed	to	maintain	their	basic
commitments.
33
[As	stated	above],	it	is	best	if	[recognition]	occurs	during	the	first	intermediate
state.	However,	if	it	does	not	occur	therein,	awareness	can	be	awakened	and
liberation	attained	during	the	second	intermediate	state.	This	second	intermediate
state	 is	 also	 called	 ‘the	 pure	 illusory	 body’.	 [During	 this	 second	 phase],
consciousness	achieves	an	instance	of	clarity,	even	though	the	deceased	may	not
know	 whether	 or	 not	 they	 are	 dead.	 If	 the	 teaching	 is	 given	 at	 this	 time,
therefore,	the	mother	and	child	aspects	of	reality	can	meet,
34
	and	[the	deceased]
will	no	longer	be	controlled	by	the	force	of	past	actions.	Just	as,	for	example,
darkness	is	destroyed	by	the	light	of	the	sun,	the	controlling	force	of	past	actions
is	destroyed	by	this	‘inner	radiance	of	the	path’	and	liberation	is	attained.
Now,	this	so-called	‘second	intermediate	state’	[occurring	at	that	point	when
consciousness	leaves	the	body]	is	one	which	suddenly	
appears	to	the	‘mental
body’	[assumed	by	the	deceased],
35
	while	the	consciousness	[of	the	deceased]
retains	the	same	range	of	hearing	as	before.	If	the	above	oral	teaching	is	given	at
this	time,	its	purpose	can	therefore	be	accomplished.	Since	the	bewildering
appearances	generated	by	past	actions	have	not	yet	arisen,	[the	deceased]	is	able
to	direct	his	or	her	attention	anywhere.	Therefore,	even	though	[the	individual]
may	not	have	attained	recognition	of	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground,	he	or	she
will	be	liberated	by	the	recognition	of	the	inner	radiance	[of	the	path],	which	is
the	second	intermediate	state.
INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REALITY
If	liberation	is	still	not	attained	through	the	above	[introductions],	then	the
intermediate	 state	 of	 reality,	 also	 called	 ‘the	 third	 intermediate	 state’,	 will
arise.
36
	It	is	during	this	third	phase	that	the	bewildering	apparitions,	[which	are

the	products]	of	past	actions,	emerge.	Therefore,	it	is	extremely	important	to	read
aloud	the	following	
Great	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality
37
	
at
this	juncture.	It	is	most	powerful	and	beneficial.
At	around	this	time,	the	bereaved	relatives	will	be	crying	and	expressing	their
grief.	They	will	no	longer	be	serving	[the	deceased’s]	share	of	food,	they	will
have	removed	his	or	her	clothes,	and	stripped	down	the	bed,	and	so	forth.
Although	[the	deceased]	can	see	them,	they	cannot	see	the	deceased.	Although
the	deceased	can	hear	them	calling	out,	they	cannot	hear	the	departed	one	calling
back.	So,	[the	deceased]	may	turn	away	in	a	state	of	despair.
At	this	time,	three	phenomena	-	sounds,	lights	and	rays	of	light	-	will	arise,
and	[the	deceased]	may	faint	with	fear,	terror	or	awe.	Thus,	during	this	period,
the	following	
Great	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Reality
	should	be
given.	Call	the	deceased	by	name	and	say	the	following	words,	with	correct
pronunciation	and	clear	diction:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	very	intently	and	without	distraction.	There
are	six	kinds	of	intermediate	state,	namely:	the	intermediate	state	of	living	or
natural	existence,	the	intermediate	
state	of	dreams,	the	intermediate	state	of
meditative	stability	or	concentration,	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,
the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 reality,	 and	 the	 intermediate	 state	 of	 consequent
rebirth.
38
	
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 [during	 and	 after	 death],	 you	 will
experience	three	intermediate	states:	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,
the	intermediate	state	of	reality	and	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	Of	these
three,	it	was	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	which	you	experienced
until	yesterday.	Although	the	inner	radiance	of	reality	arose	during	that	time,
you	did	not	recognise	it.	So	now,	[as	a	result],	you	have	been	compelled	to
wander	here;	and	now	you	will	experience	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,
followed	by	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	You	must	therefore	recognise,
without	 distraction,	 [the	 instruction	 and	 events]	 which	 I	 am	 now	 going	 to
introduce	to	you.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	that	which	is	called	death	has	now	arrived.	You
are	leaving	this	world.	But	in	this	you	are	not	alone.	This	happens	to	everyone.
Do	not	be	attached	to	this	life!	Do	not	cling	to	this	life!	Even	if	you	remain
attached	and	clinging,	you	do	not	have	the	power	to	stay	-	you	will	only	continue
to	roam	within	the	cycles	of	existence.	Therefore,	do	not	be	attached	and	do	not
cling!	Think	of	the	Three	Precious	Jewels!

O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 however	 terrifying	 the	 appearances	 of	 the
intermediate	state	of	reality	might	be,	do	not	forget	the	following	words.	Go
forward	remembering	their	meaning.	The	crucial	point	is	that	through	them
recognition	may	be	attained.
	
Alas,	now,	as	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	arises	before	me,
Renouncing	the	merest	thought	of	awe,	terror	or	fear,
I	will	recognise	all	that	arises	to	be	awareness,	manifesting	naturally	of	itself.
Knowing	such	[sounds,	lights	and	rays]	to	be	visionary	phenomena	of	the
intermediate	state,
At	this	moment,	having	reached	this	critical	point,
I	must	not	fear	the	assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	which	manifest
naturally!
	
Go	forward,	reciting	these	words	distinctly	and	be	mindful	of	their	meaning.	Do
not	forget	them!	For	it	is	essential	to	recognise,	with	
certainty,	that	whatever
terrifying	experiences	may	arise,	they	are	natural	manifestations	[of	actual
reality].	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	when	your	mind	and	body	separate,	the
pure	[luminous]	apparitions	of	reality	itself,	will	arise:	subtle	and	clear,	radiant
and	dazzling,	naturally	bright	and	awesome,	shimmering	like	a	mirage	on	a
plain	in	summer.	Do	not	fear	them!	Do	not	be	terrified!	Do	not	be	awed!	They
are	the	natural	luminosities	of	your	own	actual	reality.	Therefore	recognise	them
[as	they	are]!
From	within	these	lights,	the	natural	sound	of	reality	will	resound,	clear	and
thunderous,	reverberating	like	a	thousand	simultaneous	peals	of	thunder.	This	is
the	natural	sound	of	your	own	actual	reality.	So,	do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be
terrified!	Do	not	be	awed!	The	body	that	you	now	have	is	called	a	‘mental	body’,
it	is	the	product	of	[subtle]	propensities	and	not	a	solid	corporeal	body	of	flesh
and	blood.	Therefore,	whatever	sounds,	lights	or	rays	may	arise,	they	cannot
harm	you.	For	you	are	beyond	death	now!	It	is	enough	that	you	simply	recognise
[the	sounds	and	luminosities]	to	be	manifestations	of	your	own	[actual	reality].
Know	that	this	is	the	intermediate	state!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	now	recognise	[these	phenomena]	to
be	 natural	 manifestations,	 whatever	 meditative	 practices	 you	 may	 have
undertaken	whilst	in	the	human	world,	if	you	have	not	[previously]	encountered
this	present	instruction,	you	will	fear	the	light,	you	will	be	awed	by	the	sound
and	you	will	be	terrified	by	the	rays.	If	you	do	not	now	understand	this	essential

point	of	the	teaching,	you	will	not	recognise	the	sounds,	the	lights	and	the	rays,
and	you	will	continue	to	roam	within	the	cycles	of	existence.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	should	you	have	moved	on,	[without	recognition],
after	having	been	unconscious	for	[up	to]	three	and	a	half	days,
39
	
you	will
awaken	from	unconsciousness	and	wonder,	“What	has	happened	to	me?”	So,
recognise	this	to	be	the	intermediate	state!	At	this	time,	the	aspects	of	the	cycles
of	existence	are	reversed	[into	their	own	true	nature]	and	all	phenomena	are
arising	as	lights	and	buddha-bodies.
40
[On	the	first	day	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality],
41
	
all	space	will	arise	as
a	blue	light.	At	this	time,	from	the	central	Buddha	field	called	Pervasive	Seminal
Point,
42
	
the	transcendent	lord	Vairocana	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	white	in
colour,	seated	on	a	lion	throne,	holding	in	his	[right]	hand	an	eight-spoked
wheel	and	
embraced	by	his	consort	Ākāśadhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
	A	blue	luminosity,	radiant
and	clear,	bright	and	dazzling,	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s
expanse,	which	is	the	natural	purity	of	your	aggregate	of	consciousness,	[will
emanate]	 from	 the	 heart	 of	 Vairocana	 and	 his	 consort,	 and	 it	 will	 shine
piercingly	before	you	[at	the	level	of	your	heart,	with	such	brilliance]	that	your
eyes	 cannot	 bear	 it.	 Together	 with	 this	 [luminosity],	 a	 dull	 white	 light,
[indicative	of	the	realm]	of	the	gods,	will	also	dawn	directly	before	you	[and
touch	your	heart].	At	this	time,	under	the	sway	of	negative	past	actions,	you	will
[wish	to]	flee	in	fear	and	terror	from	the	bright	blue	light,	which	is	the	pristine
cognition	of	reality’s	expanse,	and	you	will	come	to	perceive	the	dull	white	light
of	the	god	[realms]	with	delight.	At	this	moment,	do	not	be	awed	by	the	blue
luminosity,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	clear	and	very	bright.	This	is	the
supreme	inner	radiance	[of	pristine	cognition]!	Do	not	be	terrified!	This	is	the
light	ray	of	the	Tathāgata,	which	is	called	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s
expanse.
43
	
Have	confidence	in	it!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing	devotion!	Pray,
with	 devotion,	 thinking:	 ‘This	 is	 the	 light	 ray	 of	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Vairocana’s	 compassion.	 I	 take	 refuge	 in	 it.’	 For	 this,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the
transcendent	 lord	 Vairocana	 and	 his	 consort	 come	 to	 escort	 you	 on	 the
dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate	state.	This	is	the	light	ray	of	Vairocana’s
compassion!	Therefore	do	not	delight	in	the	dull	white	light	of	the	god	[realms]!
Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	This	dull	white	light	is	the	inviting
path	created	by	your	own	habitual	tendencies	for	deep	delusion,	which	you
yourself	have	generated.
44
	
If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	roam	within	the

god	realms	and	be	drawn	into	[the	cycles	of	existence	of]	the	six	classes	of
beings.	[This	dull	light]	is	an	obstruction	blocking	the	path	to	liberation.	Do	not
look	at	it!	Be	devoted	to	the	bright	blue	light!	Focus	intently	on	the	transcendent
lord	Vairocana	and	repeat	after	me	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	delusion,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Vairocana	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse.
May	the	supreme	consort	[Ākāśa]dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	Vairocana	and	his	consort,	and	you	will	attain
buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the	central	Buddha
field	of	the	Dense	Array
	
(
Ghanavyūha
).
	
If,	however,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	as	the	result	of	negative
obscuration	and	aversion,	[the	deceased]	are	nonetheless	overawed	by	the	lights
and	rays,	and	turn	away,	and	even	if,	after	repeating	the	aspirational	prayer,	they
remain	bewildered,	then,	on	the	second	day,	Vajrasattva’s	assembly	of	deities
will	come	to	escort	them,	and,	at	that	same	time,	the	negative	past	actions	which
are	conducive	to	a	rebirth	in	the	hell	[realms]	will	also	emerge.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	second	day	the
purity	of	the	entire	element	water	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	white	light.	At	that
time,	from	the	eastern	Buddha	field	of	Manifest	Joy
	(
Abhirati
)
,	the	transcendent
lord	Akṣobhya-Vajrasattva	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	blue	in	colour,	holding
in	his	[right]	hand	a	five-pronged	vajra,	seated	on	an	elephant	throne	and
embraced	 by	 his	 consort	 Buddhalocanā.	 They	 are	 encircled	 by	 two	 male
bodhisattvas,	Kṣitigarbha	and	Maitreya,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,	Lāsyā
and	Puṣpā,	thus,	six	buddha-bodies	will	be	shining	before	you	from	within	a
space	of	rainbow	light.

A	[brilliant]	white	light,	[indicative	of]	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition,
which	is	the	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	form,	white	and	dazzling,	radiant
and	clear	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Vajrasattva	and	his	consort	and	it	will
shine	piercingly	before	you	[at	the	level	of	your	heart,	with	such	brilliance]	that
your	eyes	cannot	bear	it.	Together	with	this	light	of	pristine	cognition,	a	dull
smoky	light,	[indicative	of]	the	hell	[realms],	will	also	dawn	before	you	[and
touch	your	heart].	At	that	time,	under	the	sway	of	aversion,	you	will	[wish	to]
turn	away	in	fear	and	terror	from	the	
bright	white	light	and	come	to	perceive	the
dull	smoky	light	of	the	hell	[realms]	with	delight.	At	that	moment,	you	should
fearlessly	recognise	the	white	light,	white	and	dazzling,	radiant	and	clear,	to	be
pristine	cognition.	Have	confidence	in	it!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing	devotion!
Pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is	the	light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord
Vajrasattva’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge	in	it.’	This,	in	reality,	is	Vajrasattva	and
his	consort	come	to	escort	you	on	the	dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate
state.	This	is	the	light-ray	hook	of	Vajrasattva’s	compassion!	Be	devoted	to	it!	Do
not	delight	in	the	dull	smoky	light	of	the	hell	[realms]!	This	[dull	light]	is	the
inviting	path	of	the	negative	obscurations	created	by	your	own	deep	aversion,
which	you	yourself	have	generated.	If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	fall
into	the	realms	of	hell,	sinking	into	a	swamp	of	unbearable	suffering,	from	which
there	will	be	no	[immediate]	opportunity	for	escape.	[This	dull	light]	is	an
obstacle	 blocking	 the	 path	 to	 liberation.	 Do	 not	 look	 at	 it!	 Abandon	 your
aversion!	Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be	devoted	to	the	white
light,	radiant	and	dazzling!	Focus	intently	on	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva
and	recite	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	aversion,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition.
May	the	supreme	consort	Buddhalocanā	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	[you]	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva,	and	you	will
attain	buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the	eastern

Buddha	field	of	Manifest	Joy
	(
Abhirati
).
	
Yet,	even	after	being	introduced	in	this	way,	there	are	some	individuals	who	will
turn	away	in	fear	from	the	light-ray	hook	of	
compassion,	being	gripped	by	pride
and	 powerful	 negative	 obscuration.	
45
	 So	 it	 is	 that,	 on	 the	 third	 day,	 the
transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava’s	assembly	of	deities	will	come	to	escort	[the
deceased]	and	simultaneously	the	light	path	indicative	of	the	human	realm	will
emerge.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	third	day,	the
purity	of	the	entire	element	earth	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	yellow	light.	At	this
time,	 from	 the	 yellow	 southern	 Buddha	 field	 of	 the	 Glorious
	 (
Śr
ῑ
mat
)
,	 the
transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	yellow	in
colour,	 holding	 in	 his	 [right]	 hand	 a	 jewel,	 seated	 on	 a	 horse	 throne	 and
embraced	by	his	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ.
	They	are	encircled	by	two	male
bodhisattvas,	Ākāśagarbha	and	Samantabhadra,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,
Mālyā	and	Dhūpā,	thus,	six	buddha-bodies	will	be	shining	before	you	from
within	a	space	of	rainbow	light.
A	yellow	light	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness,	which	is	the
natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	feeling,	yellow	and	dazzling,	adorned	by
greater	and	lesser	seminal	points	[of	light],	radiant,	clear	and	unbearable	to	the
eyes,	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Ratnasambhava	and	his	consort	and	will
shine	piercingly	before	you	at	the	level	of	your	heart	[with	such	brilliance]	that
your	eyes	cannot	bear	it.	Together	with	the	light	of	pristine	cognition,	a	dull	blue
light,	[indicative	of]	the	human	realm,	will	also	dawn	before	you	and	touch	your
heart.	At	that	time,	under	the	sway	of	pride,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	fear
and	terror	from	the	bright	yellow	light	and	you	will	come	to	delight	in	the	dull
blue	light	of	the	human	realm	and	feel	attachment	towards	it.	At	that	moment,
abandon	your	fear	of	the	yellow	light,	and	recognise	it	as	pristine	cognition,
yellow	and	dazzling,	radiant	and	clear!	Let	your	awareness	relax	and	abide
directly	within	it,	in	a	state	of	non-activity.
46
	
Again	and	again,	have	confidence
in	it!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing	devotion!	If	you	recognise	it	as	the	natural
luminosity	 of	 your	 own	 awareness,	 even	 though	 you	 may	 feel	 no	 devotion
towards	it	and	have	not	recited	the	aspirational	prayer,	all	the	buddha-bodies

and	 light	 rays	 will	 dissolve	 inseparably	 into	 you	 and	 you	 will	 attain
buddhahood.	If	you	are	unable	to	recognise	
this	[radiance]	as	being	the	natural
luminosity	of	your	own	awareness,	then	pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is	the
light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge	in
it.’	This,	in	reality,	is	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	come	to	escort	you
on	the	fearsome	dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate	state.	This	is	the	light-
ray	hook	of	Ratnasambhava’s	compassion!	Be	devoted	to	it!	Do	not	delight	in	the
dull	blue	light	of	the	human	realm.	This	[dull	light]	is	the	inviting	path	created
by	your	own	habitual	tendencies	for	deep-seated	pride,	which	you	yourself	have
generated.	If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	tumble	down	into	the	human
realm,	you	will	experience	the	sufferings	of	birth,	old	age,	sickness	and	death,
and	there	will	be	no	[immediate]	opportunity	to	escape	from	the	swamp	of	cyclic
existence.	This	[dull	light]	is	an	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!	Do	not
look	 at	 it!	 Abandon	 pride!	 Abandon	 your	 habitual	 tendencies!	 Do	 not	 be
attached	to	the	dull	blue	light!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be	devoted	to	the	yellow	light,
golden	and	dazzling.	Focus	intently	and	single-mindedly	on	the	transcendent
lord	Ratnasambhava	and	recite	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	pride,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness.
May	the	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava,	and	you	will
attain	buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the	southern
Buddha	field	of	the	Glorious
	(
Śr
ῑ
mat
).
	
There	is	no	doubt	that	if	[the	deceased]	are	receptive	to	this	introduction,	they
will	attain	liberation,	however	weak	their	[individual]	ability	may	be.	Yet,	even
after	being	given	this	introduction	many	times,	there	are	some	whose	positive
opportunities	have	been	exhausted	by,	for	example,	their	great	negativity	or
through	not	
having	maintained	their	commitments	and	so	forth,	who,	even	now,

will	not	have	accepted	this	introduction.	These	individuals	will	have	turned	away
in	fear	of	both	the	sounds	and	the	luminosities	and	become	agitated	by	desire
and	negative	obscuration.	So	it	is	that,	on	the	fourth	day,	the	transcendent	lord
Amitābha’s	assembly	of	deities	will	come	to	escort	them	and,	at	that	same	time,
the	 light	 path	 [indicative	 of	 the	 realm]	 of	 the	 anguished	 spirits,	 which	 is
generated	by	desire	and	miserliness,	will	emerge.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	fourth	day,	the
purity	of	the	element	fire	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	red	light.	At	that	time,	from
the	red	western	Buddha	field	of	the	Blissful
	(
Sukhāvat
ῑ
)
,	the	transcendent	lord
Amitābha	will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	red	in	colour,	holding	in	his	[right]
hand	a	lotus	flower,	seated	on	a	peacock	throne	and	embraced	by	the	supreme
consort	 Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ.
	 They	 are	 encircled	 by	 two	 male	 bodhisattvas,
Avalokiteśvara	and	Mañjuśr
ῑ
,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,	G
ῑ
tā	and	Ālokā,
thus,	six	 buddha-bodies	 will	be	 shining	 before	you	 from	within	a	 space	 of
rainbow	light.
A	red	light	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment,	which	is	the
natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	perceptions,	red	and	dazzling,	adorned	by
greater	and	lesser	seminal	points,	radiant	and	clear,	bright	and	dazzling,	[will
emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Amitābha	and	his	consort	and	will	shine	piercingly
before	you	at	the	level	of	your	heart	[with	such	brilliance]	that	your	eyes	cannot
bear	it.	Do	not	be	afraid!	Together	with	the	light	of	pristine	cognition,	a	dull
yellow	light,	[indicative	of	the	realm]	of	anguished	spirits,	will	also	dawn	before
you	[and	touch	your	heart].	Do	not	delight	[in	the	dull	yellow	light]!	Do	not
become	attached	to	it	and	do	not	cling	to	it!	At	this	time,	under	the	sway	of	deep
desire,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	terror	from	the	bright	red	light	and	you
will	come	to	delight	in	the	dull	yellow	light	of	the	anguished	spirits	and	feel
attachment	towards	it.	At	this	moment,	abandon	your	fear,	and	recognise	the	red
light,	bright	and	dazzling,	radiant	and	clear,	to	be	pristine	cognition.	Let	your
awareness	relax	and	abide	directly	within	it,	resting	in	a	state	of	non-activity.
Have	confidence	in	the	radiant,	red	luminosity!	Be	drawn	to	it	with	longing
devotion.	If	you	recognise	this	radiance	as	the	natural	luminosity	
of	your	own
awareness,	even	though	you	may	feel	no	devotion	towards	it	and	have	not	recited
the	 aspirational	 prayer,	 all	 the	 buddha-bodies	 and	 light	 rays	 will	 dissolve
inseparably	[into	you]	and	you	will	attain	buddhahood.	If	you	are	not	able	to

recognise	[the	radiance]	in	this	way,	then	pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is
the	light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge	in	it.’
This	truly	is	the	light-ray	hook	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha’s	compassion!
Be	devoted	to	it!	Do	not	turn	away!	Should	you	turn	away,	the	luminosity	will
accompany	you	inseparably.	Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	attached	to	the	dull
yellow	light	of	the	anguished	spirits!	This	is	the	inviting	path	created	by	your
own	 habitual	 tendencies	 for	 deep-seated	 desire,	 which	 you	 yourself	 have
generated.	If	you	become	attached	to	this	[dull	light],	you	will	fall	down	into	the
realm	of	the	anguished	spirits	and	you	will	experience	unbearable	sufferings	of
hunger	and	thirst.	This	[dull	light]	is	an	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!
Do	not	be	attached	to	it!	Abandon	your	attachment!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be
devoted	to	the	red	light,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	and	focus	intently	and
single-mindedly	on	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	and	his	consort,	and	recite
the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	desire,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light	in	the	heart	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	and	his	consort,
and	you	will	attain	buddhahood,	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	in	the
western	Buddha	field	of	the	Blissful
	(
Sukhāvat
ῑ
).
	
Although	it	is	impossible	not	to	be	liberated	by	[the	successful	recognition	of]
this	[introduction],	there	are	nonetheless	those	who	will	be	unable	to	give	up
their	 propensities	 due	 to	 habituation	 over	
long	 periods	 of	 time,	 even	 after
receiving	 such	 an	 introduction.	 Under	 the	 sway	 of	 envy	 and	 negative	 past
actions,	they	will	become	fearful	and	overawed	by	the	sounds	and	luminosities.
Failing	to	be	caught	by	the	light-ray	hook	of	compassion,	they	roam	downwards
into	 the	 fifth	 day.	 So	 it	 is	 that,	 on	 the	 fifth	 day,	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Amoghasiddhi’s	 assembly	 of	 deities,	 resplendent	 with	 the	 light	 rays	 of

compassion,	will	come	to	escort	them	and,	at	the	same	time,	the	light	path
indicative	of	[the	realm	of]	the	antigods,	which	is	generated	by	the	dissonant
mental	state	of	envy,	will	emerge	invitingly.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	now	be	given
with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	fifth	day,	the	purity
of	the	entire	wind	element	will	arise	in	the	form	of	a	green	light.	At	that	time,
from	the	green	northern	Buddha	field	[called]	Matrix	of	Enlightened	Activities
(
Karmaprasiddhi
)
,	the	transcendent	lord	Buddha	Amoghasiddhi	with	his	retinue
will	dawn	before	you,	his	body	green	in	colour,	holding	in	his	[right]	hand	a
crossed-vajra,	 seated	 on	 a	 c
ῑ
vaṃc
ῑ
vaka	 bird	 throne	 and	 embraced	 by	 the
supreme	consort	Samayatārā.	These	two	are	encircled	by	two	male	bodhisattvas,
Vajrapāṇi	and	Nivāraṇaviṣkhambhin,	and	two	female	bodhisattvas,	Gandhā	and
Nart
ῑ.
	Thus,	six	buddha-bodies	will	be	shining	[before	you]	from	within	a	space
of	rainbow	light.
A	green	light	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment,	which
is	the	natural	purity	of	the	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies,	green	and
dazzling,	radiant	and	clear,	bright	and	awesome,	adorned	by	greater	and	lesser
seminal	points,	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Amoghasiddhi	and	his	consort
and	it	will	shine	piercingly	before	you	at	the	level	of	your	heart,	[with	such
brilliance]	that	your	eyes	cannot	bear	it.	Do	not	be	afraid!	This	is	the	natural
expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness!	Rest	in	a	state	of	great	equanimity,
transcending	activity,	free	from	[the	dichotomies	of]	attachment	and	aversion,
based	on	[your	feelings	of]	nearness	and	distance.	Together	with	the	light	of
pristine	cognition,	a	dull	red	light,	[indicative	of	the	realm]	of	the	antigods	and
formed	by	envy,	will	also	dawn	before	you	[and	touch	your	heart].	Cultivate	an
equanimity	toward	this	[dull	light]	which	is	free	from	attachment	or	aversion!
Even	if	your	mental	capacity	is	diminished,	
at	least	do	not	delight	in	it.	At	this
time,	under	the	sway	of	deep	envy,	you	will	[wish	to]	turn	away	in	terror	from
the	bright	and	dazzling	green	luminosity	and	you	will	come	to	feel	delight	and
attachment	towards	the	dull	red	light	of	the	antigods.	At	this	moment,	abandon
your	fear,	and	recognise	the	green	luminosity,	bright	and	dazzling,	radiant	and
clear,	to	be	pristine	cognition.	Let	your	awareness	relax	and	abide	directly
within	it,	resting	in	a	state	of	non-activity.	Pray	with	devotion,	thinking:	‘This	is
the	light	ray	of	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi’s	compassion.	I	take	refuge
in	 it.’	 This,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the	 light-ray	 hook	 of	 the	 transcendent	 lord

Amoghasiddhi’s	 compassion,	 which	 is	 known	 as	 the	 pristine	 cognition	 of
accomplishment.	Be	devoted	to	it!	Do	not	turn	away!	Even	if	you	do	turn	away,
the	luminosity	will	accompany	you	inseparably.	So,	do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be
attached	to	the	dull	red	light	of	the	antigods.	This	is	the	inviting	path	of	your
past	actions,	which	you	yourself	have	engaged	in,	whilst	motivated	by	deep	envy.
If	you	become	attached	to	this	dull	light,	you	will	fall	into	the	realms	of	the
antigods	and	experience	the	unbearable	sufferings	of	[unrelenting]	conflict	and
quarrelling.	This	[dull	light]	is	an	obstacle	blocking	the	path	to	liberation!	Do
not	be	attached	to	it!	Give	up	your	yearning!	Do	not	cling	to	it!	Be	devoted	to
the	green	light,	which	is	radiant	and	dazzling,	and	focus	intently	and	single-
mindedly	on	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi	and	his	consort,	and	recite	the
following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	envy,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Samayatārā	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	 light	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 transcendent	 lord	 Amoghasiddhi	 and	 his
consort,	 and	 you	 will	 attain	 buddhahood,	 as	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource,	 in	 the	 northern	 Buddha	 field	 [called]	 ‘Matrix	 of	 Enlightened
Activities’
	(
Karmaprasiddhi
).
By	giving	this	introduction	repeatedly	in	this	way,	however	weak	the	[positive]
residue	of	[a	deceased	individual’s]	past	actions	might	be,	he	or	she	will	[have
the	opportunity	to]	attain	recognition	at	one	point	or	another.	As	recognition
occurs	at	any	point,	it	will	be	impossible	for	liberation	not	to	be	achieved.
However,	owing	to	a	long	association	with	myriad	habitual	tendencies	and	an
unfamiliarity	with	pure	vision	and	pristine	cognition,	even	after	being	introduced
repeatedly	in	this	way,	there	are	some	who	are	nevertheless	led	backwards	by
negative	propensities,	despite	this	setting	face	to	face	having	been	given.	Failing
to	be	gripped	by	the	light-ray	hook	of	compassion,	they	will	be	overcome	by
awe	and	terror	[upon	the	arising]	of	the	lights	and	rays,	and	continue	to	wander

downwards.
Thereupon,	 on	 the	 sixth	 day,	 the	 male	 and	 female	 deities	 of	 the	 five
enlightened	families,	together	with	their	retinues,	will	arise	simultaneously,	and
at	that	very	moment,	the	six	[dull]	lights,	[indicative]	of	the	six	classes	of	living
beings,	will	also	arise	simultaneously.
Therefore,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given
with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	Until	yesterday	the	visions
of	the	five	individual	enlightened	families	arose	before	you.	Despite	this,	even
though	the	[former]	introduction	was	given,	you	experienced	awe	and	terror;	a
response	 generated	 by	 your	 habitual	 tendencies.	 Consequently,	 you	 have
remained	in	your	present	state,	until	now.	If	you	had	previously	recognised	[one
of]	the	natural	luminosities	of	the	pristine	cognitions	of	the	five	enlightened
families	as	being	a	natural	manifestation	[of	actual	reality],	you	would	have
dissolved	into	rainbow	light	[at	the	heart]	of	[one	of]	these	buddha-bodies	of	the
five	respective	enlightened	families,	and	attained	buddhahood,	in	the	Buddha-
body	of	Perfect	Resource.	Yet,	since	you	have	been	unable	to	recognise	these
[experiences]	 as	 being	 natural	 manifestations,	 you	 have	 wandered	 here.
Therefore,	listen	now,	without	distraction.	The	vision	of	the	entire	[peaceful
assembly]	of	the	five	enlightened	families,	together	with	that	which	is	called:
‘the	vision	of	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined’,
47
	
will	now	come	to	invite
you.	Recognise	this!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	[at	this	time]	the	four	coloured	
lights,	which	are
the	pure	forms	of	the	four	elements,	will	dawn	before	you;	and,	simultaneously,
the	buddha	Vairocana	and	his	consort	will	arise,	as	before,	from	the	central
Buddha	field	of	the	Pervasive	Seminal	Point	[i.e.	Akaniṣṭha-Ghanavyūha].	[At
that	same	moment],	the	buddha	Vajrasattva	and	his	consort,	surrounded	by	their
retinue,	will	arise	from	the	eastern	Buddha	field	of	Manifest	Joy
	(
Abhirati
)
.	The
buddha	Ratnasambhava	and	his	consort,	together	with	their	retinue,	will	arise
from	the	southern	Buddha	field	of	the	Glorious
	(
Śr
ῑ
mat
)
.	The	buddha	Amitābha
and	his	consort,	together	with	their	retinue,	will	arise	from	the	western	Buddha
field	of	the	Blissful
	(
Sukhāvat
ῑ
)
,	and	the	buddha	Amoghasiddhi	and	his	consort,
together	with	their	retinue,	will	now	arise	before	you	from	the	northern	Buddha
field	[called]	Matrix	of	Enlightened	Activities	[i.e.	Karmaprasiddhi],	[all	arising
together]	out	of	a	space	of	rainbow	light.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	encircling	these	male	and	female	deities	of	the

five	enlightened	families,	the	male	gatekeepers,	[Trailokya]vijaya,	Yamāntaka,
Hayagr
ῑ
varāja	and	Amṛtakuṇḍalin,	will	also	arise,	together	with	the	female
gatekeepers,	 Aṅkuśā,	 Pāśā,	 Sphoṭā	 and	 Ghaṇṭā.	 In	 addition,	 the	 six
[emanational]	sages	who	are	transcendent	lords,	will	also	appear	before	you:
Indraśakra	who	is	the	sage	of	the	gods,	Vemacitra	who	is	the	sage	of	the
antigods,	Śākyamuni	who	is	the	sage	of	humans,	Sthirasimha	who	is	the	sage	of
the	 animals,	 Jvālamukha	 who	 is	 the	 sage	 of	 the	 anguished	 spirits,	 and
Dharmarāja	 who	 is	 the	 sage	 of	 the	 hell	 beings.	 [Accompanying	 the	 above
array],	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
	will	also	arise	before	you,	[in	the
form	called]	Samantabhadra	and	Consort	in	Union,	[the	coalescence]	which	is
the	progenitor	of	all	the	buddhas.
These,	 the	 forty-two	 assembled	 deities	 of	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource,	will	emanate	from	within	your	heart	and	then	appear	before	you.
Recognise	them!	For	they	have	arisen	from	within	your	own	pure	vision!	O,
Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	these	buddha	fields	do	not	exist	extraneously.	They	are
the	five	aspects	of	your	own	heart;	its	four	directions	and	centre.	Emanating	now
from	within	your	own	heart,	they	have	arisen	before	you.	These	buddha-bodies
have	not	arisen	extraneously.	They	have	spontaneously	arisen,	atemporally,	from
the	natural	expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness.	Therefore	recognise	them
as	they	are!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	these	buddha-bodies	[that	you	see	before	you]	are
neither	large	nor	small,	but	perfectly	proportioned,	and	they	are	[all	adorned]
with	 their	 respective	 ornaments,	 [costumes],	 colours,	 postures,	 thrones	 and
hand-gestures.	The	array	is	made	up	of	[central]	couples	[of	male	and	female
deities],	forming	five	distinct	clusters,	and	each	cluster	of	five	is	encircled	by	an
aura	of	five-coloured	lights.	All	the	male	bodhisattvas	of	the	[five]	enlightened
families	who	accompany	the	male	[buddhas],	all	the	female	bodhisattvas	of	the
[five]	enlightened	families	who	accompany	the	female	[buddhas],	and	the	entire
maṇḍala	will	arise	[before	you],	perfectly	and	simultaneously.	So	recognise
them!	They	are	your	own	meditational	deities!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	from	the	hearts	of	the	male	and	female	buddhas	of
the	 five	 enlightened	 families,	 the	 light	 rays	 of	 the	 ‘four	 pristine	 cognitions
combined’,	very	fine	and	clear,	like	a	spider’s	web,	will	dawn	before	your	heart,
[like	the]	entwined	light	rays	of	the	sun.
First,	a	sheet	of	radiant	white
48
	
light	rays,	bright	and	awesome,	[indicative
of]	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse,	will	emanate	from	the	heart	of

Vairocana,	and	touch	your	heart.	Above
49
	
this	sheet	of	light,	a	white	seminal
point	resembling	a	mirror	facing	downwards	will	arise,	emanating	light	rays,
extremely	radiant,	bright	and	dazzling,	adorned	with	five	distinct	seminal	points
of	like	nature,	each	of	which	in	turn	will	be	adorned	by	greater	and	lesser
seminal	points,	[forming	an	array]	with	no	centre	or	horizon.
[Second],	a	sheet	of	radiant	blue	light,	[indicative	of]	the	mirror-like	pristine
cognition,	 [will	 emanate]	 from	 the	 heart	 of	 Vajrasattva.	 Above	 this,	 like	 a
turquoise	bowl	facing	downwards,	a	radiant	blue	seminal	point	will	arise,	[also]
adorned	by	[an	array	of]	greater	and	lesser	seminal	points.
[Third],	a	sheet	of	radiant	yellow	light,	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition
of	sameness,	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Ratnasambhava.	Above	this,	like	a
gold	cup	facing	downwards,	a	radiant	yellow	seminal	point	will	arise,	[also]
adorned	by	[an	array	of]	greater	and	lesser	seminal	points.
[Fourth],	a	sheet	of	radiant	red	light,	[indicative	of]	the	pristine	cognition	of
discernment,	[will	emanate]	from	the	heart	of	Amitābha.	Above	this,	like	a	coral
bowl	 facing	 downwards,	 a	 radiant	 red	 seminal	 point	 will	 arise,	 extremely
luminous	and	dazzling,	
[resplendent]	with	the	luminosity	of	pristine	cognition.	It
too	will	be	adorned	with	five	distinct	seminal	points	of	like	nature,	each	of	which
in	turn	will	also	be	adorned	by	greater	and	lesser	seminal	points,	[forming	an
array]	with	no	centre	or	horizon.	All	of	these	[lights	and	seminal	points]	will
indeed	arise,	and	touch	your	heart.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	these	[radiances]	are	arising	out	of	the	natural
expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness.	They	have	not	come	from	anywhere
else.	Therefore,	do	not	be	attached	to	them!	Do	not	be	a	fraid	of	them!	Relax	and
rest	in	a	non-conceptual	state.
50
	
[Abiding]	in	this	state,	all	the	buddha-bodies
and	light	rays	will	merge	into	you,	and	buddhahood	will	then	be	attained.
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 [during	 the	 above	 series]	 the	 green	 light
[indicative]	of	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment	will	not	arise.	The
reason	for	this	is	that	the	natural	expressive	power	of	pristine	cognition,	which	is
your	own	intrinsic	awareness,	is	not	yet	perfected.
51
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	this	[array	of	luminosities	that	you	are	now
experiencing]	is	called:	‘the	vision	of	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined’.	It
is	[also]	known	as	the	‘hollow	passageway	of	Vajrasattva’.
52
	
At	 this	 time,
therefore,	you	should	recall	the	oral	instructions,	which	your	spiritual	teacher
formerly	 introduced	 to	 you.	 If	 you	 [successfully]	 recall	 this	 [former]
introduction,	you	will	have	confidence	in	the	visions	that	have	already	arisen,

and	you	will	recognise	them,	just	as	there	is	instant	recognition	at	the	meeting	of
a	mother	and	her	son,	or	just	as	one	instantly	recognises	an	old	acquaintance
the	moment	one	sees	them.	Cutting	through	any	doubt,	you	will	recognise	[these
radiances]	 to	 be	 natural	 manifestations	 [of	 actual	 reality].	 Achieving
confidence,	in	this	way,	in	the	unchanging	path	of	pure	reality,	and	sustaining	a
continuous	meditative	stability,
53
	
you	will	dissolve	into	the	buddha-body	of
great	spontaneously	present	awareness
54
	
and	irreversibly	attain	buddhahood	in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	together	with	the	radiances	of	pristine	cognition,
the	six	[dull]	lights	[indicative]	of	the	six	classes	[of	beings]	who	are	obscured
by	impure	and	bewildering	perception,	will	also	arise	simultaneously.	That	is	to
say,	the	dull	white	light	of	the	gods,	the	dull	red	light	of	the	antigods,	the	dull
blue	light	of	the	humans,	the	dull	green	light	of	the	animals,	the	dull	yellow	light
of	the	anguished	spirits,	and	the	dull	smoky	light	of	the	inhabitants	of	the	hells
will	arise	alongside	the	radiances	of	
pure	pristine	cognition.	At	that	moment,	do
not	seize	upon,	or	become	attached	to,	any	[of	these	lights]!	Relax	and	abide	in
a	non-referential	state.	For	if	you	are	fearful	of	the	pure	radiances	of	pristine
cognition	and	become	attached	to	the	impure	lights	of	cyclic	existence	with	its
six	classes	[of	beings],	you	will	assume	a	body	amongst	[one	of]	these	six
realms,	and	you	will	be	debilitated;	for	there	will	be	no	[immediate]	opportunity
for	escape	from	cyclic	existence,	this	vast	ocean	of	suffering.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	are	one	who	has	not	been	introduced	to	the
oral	instructions	of	a	spiritual	teacher,	you	will	be	frightened	and	overwhelmed
by	 these	 buddha-bodies	 and	 the	 radiances	 of	 pure	 pristine	 cognition,	 just
described,	and	you	will	feel	attachment	towards	the	[dull]	lights	of	impure	cyclic
existence.	Do	not	do	this!	Be	devoted	to	the	bright	and	dazzling	radiances	of
pure	pristine	cognition.	Be	full	of	devotion	and	think:	‘The	light	rays	of	pristine
cognition,	which	are	the	compassion	of	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	the	transcendent
lords	of	the	five	enlightened	families,	have	come	to	seize	me	with	compassion.	I
take	refuge	in	them.’	Do	not	be	attached	to	the	bewildering	lights	of	the	six
classes	[of	beings].	Do	not	cling	to	them!	Focus	one-pointedly	on	the	male	and
female	 buddhas	 of	 the	 five	 enlightened	 families	 and	 recite	 the	 following
aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	the	five	virulent	poisons,
May	the	transcendent	conquerors,	[the	male	buddhas]	of	the	five	enlightened

families,	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined.
May	the	five	supreme	female	buddhas,	[the	purity	of]	the	expanse,	support	me
from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	light	paths	of	the	six	impure	classes	[of	beings]!
Released	from	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
May	I	be	escorted	to	the	five	utterly	supreme	and	pure	buddha	fields.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer,	[the	superior	adept]	will	recognise	[the
radiances	of	pristine	cognition]	to	be	natural	manifestations	[of	actual	reality]
and	thereby,	upon	dissolving	indivisibly	
with	them,	buddhahood	will	be	attained.
Those	of	average	ability	will	achieve	recognition	on	the	basis	of	fervent	devotion
and	thereby	attain	liberation,	and	even	all	[those	of	inferior	ability]	can,	through
the	power	of	pure	aspiration,	close	the	womb	entrances	through	which	the	six
classes	[of	beings	are	born].	Thus,	if	the	nature	of	‘the	four	pristine	cognitions
combined’	is	realised,	[all	of	the	above	individuals]	can	attain	buddhahood
through	‘the	hollow	passageway	of	Vajrasattva’.	As	a	result	of	being	introduced
in	such	a	clear	and	detailed	way,	the	majority	will	attain	recognition	and	many
[individuals]	will	achieve	liberation.
However,	those	most	lowly	individuals	in	the	human	world	who	totally	lack
the	 propensities	 for	 spiritual	 practice,	 and	 those	 who	 have	 broken	 their
commitments	and	so	forth,	will	continue	to	be	bewildered,	as	a	result	of	their
[negative]	past	actions.	Despite	being	introduced,	they	will	continue	to	roam
downwards,	failing	to	achieve	recognition.
So	it	is,	that	on	the	seventh	day,	the	divine	assembly	of	the	Awareness	Holders
will	 arise	 from	 the	 pure	 realm	 of	 the	 sky-farers	 and	 come	 to	 escort	 [the
deceased],	as	will,	simultaneously,	the	light	path	to	the	animal	realm,	formed	of
the	dissonant	mental	state,	delusion.
55
At	this	time,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given
with	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	seventh	day,	a	five-
faceted	multicoloured	light,	[which	is	indicative	of]	the	purity	of	your	habitual
tendencies	in	the	expanse	[of	reality],	will	arise	before	you.	Simultaneously,	the

divine	assembly	of	the	awareness	holders,	arising	from	the	pure	realm	of	the	sky-
farers,	will	come	forward	to	escort	you.
In	 the	 centre	 of	 [this	 maṇḍala],	 suffused	 by	 rainbows	 and	 light,	 the
unsurpassed	 [Vidyādhara]	 known	 as	 the	 ‘awareness	 holder	 of	 maturation’,
Padmanarteśvara,	 will	 instantaneously	 arise,	 his	 body	 resplendent	 with	 the
radiance	of	the	five	lights,	embraced	by	his	consort,	a	red	ḍākin
ῑ
,	[who	is
dancing]	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised	in	the	gesture	of
pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	east	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	who	abides	on	the	levels’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	white	in
colour,	his	face	radiant	and	smiling.	He	is	embraced	by	his	consort,	a	white
ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is	dancing	with	a	
blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised	in	the
gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	south	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	with	power	over	the	lifespan’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	yellow
in	colour	and	adorned	by	the	exquisite	[eighty]	minor	marks.	He	is	embraced	by
his	consort,	a	yellow	ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is	dancing	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a
curved	knife,	raised	in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	west	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	of	the	great	seal’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	red	in	colour,	his
face	radiant	and	smiling.	He	is	embraced	by	his	consort,	a	red	ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is
dancing	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised	in	the	gesture	of
pointing	to	the	sky.
From	the	north	of	the	maṇḍala,	[the	Vidyādhara]	known	as	the	‘awareness
holder	of	spontaneous	presence’	will	instantaneously	arise,	his	body	green	in
colour,	his	face	both	wrathful	and	smiling.	He	is	embraced	by	his	consort,	a
green	ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	is	dancing	with	a	blood-filled	skull	and	a	curved	knife,	raised
in	the	gesture	of	pointing	to	the	sky.
Encircling	 these	 awareness	 holders,	 there	 will	 be	 inestimable	 crowds	 of
ḍākin
ῑ
s:	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	eight	charnel	grounds,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	four	enlightened
families,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	three	abodes,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the	ten	directions,	ḍākin
ῑ
s	of	the
twenty-four	power-places,	spiritual	heroes	and	heroines,	faithful	retainers,
56
and	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings	-	all	wearing	the	six	kinds	of	bone
ornaments,	playing	drums,	thigh-bone	trumpets,	and	skull	drums	and	[waving]
banners	made	of	the	hide	of	‘ritually	liberated’	beings,	canopies	and	streamers
of	human	hide,	[the	entire	display	pervaded	by]	an	incense	cloud	of	burning
human	flesh,	reverberating	with	the	sound	of	countless	and	diverse	musical

instruments,	the	sound	permeating	all	world	systems,	causing	them	to	vibrate,
tremble	and	quake.	The	crescendo	will	reverberate	as	if	to	split	your	head.
Performing	their	diverse	dances,	this	[array]	will	come	to	escort	those	who	have
kept	their	commitments	and	to	bring	to	account	those	who	have	allowed	their
commitments	to	degenerate.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	a	five-coloured	light,	which	is	[indicative	of]	the
purity	of	your	habitual	tendencies	in	the	expanse	[of	reality]	and	of	coemergent
pristine	cognition,	composed	of	
coloured	threads	[of	light]	twisted	together,
pulsing,	 shimmering,	 translucent,	 radiant,	 clear,	 bright	 and	 awesome,	 [will
emanate]	from	the	hearts	of	the	five	principal	awareness	holders	and	will	shine
piercingly	before	you,	at	the	level	of	your	heart	[with	such	brilliance]	that	your
eyes	cannot	bear	it.	At	that	moment,	a	dull	green	light,	[indicative	of]	the	realms
of	the	animals,	will	arise	simultaneously	with	the	light	of	pristine	cognition	[and
touch	your	heart].	At	this	time,	bewildered	and	confused	by	your	past	habitual
tendencies,	you	will	be	frightened	by	the	five-coloured	light,	and	wish	to	turn
away.	Instantly,	you	will	be	attracted	to	the	dull	light	of	the	animal	realms,	so
therefore,	do	not	be	frightened	now	by	the	bright	and	flashing	five-coloured
light!	Do	not	be	terrified!	Recognise	this	[radiance]	to	be	pristine	cognition!
Within	the	[five-coloured]	light,	all	the	natural	sounds	of	the	sacred	teachings
will	resound	like	a	thousand	simultaneous	peals	of	thunder.	They	will	resound
like	a	[violent]	echo,	an	overwhelming	reverberation,	a	tumultuous	crescendo,	a
cacophony	of	war	cries,	and	[pound	with	the	roar	of]	wrathful	mantras	of
terrifying	ferocity.	Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	turn	away!	Recognise	these	sounds
and	luminosities	to	be	the	naturally	expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness,
manifesting	naturally.	Do	not	be	attracted	to	the	dull	green	light	of	the	animals.
Do	not	cling	to	it!	If	you	become	attached	to	it,	you	will	fall	into	the	obscured
realms	of	the	animals	and	be	enveloped	by	the	limitless	sufferings	of	obfuscation,
dumbness	and	servility,	from	which	there	will	be	no	[immediate]	opportunity	for
release.	So	do	not	be	attached	to	that	[dull	green	light]!	Be	devoted	to	the	five-
coloured	light	that	is	radiant	and	dazzling!	Focus	intently	and	one-pointedly	on
the	 divine	 assembly	 of	 the	 awareness	 holders,	 the	 transcendent	 lords	 and
spiritual	teachers,	thinking:	‘As	you,	the	Awareness	Holders	together	with	your
[attending]	heroes	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s	have	come	forward	to	escort	me	to	the	pure	realm
of	the	sky-farers,	I	implore	you,	pity	sentient	beings	such	as	myself	who	have
failed	to	amass	the	accumulations	[of	merit	and	pristine	cognition],	and	pity
those	such	as	I,	who	have	not	been	rescued	until	now,	even	though	we	have	been
embraced	by	the	compassion	of	all	the	assembled	deities	of	the	five	enlightened

families,	Those	Gone	to	Bliss,	throughout	the	three	times!	Today	may	you,	the
divine	assembly	of	awareness	holders,	not	allow	me	to	descend	any	further	than
this.	Grasp	me	with	the	hook	of	your	compassion,	
and	lead	me	immediately	to
the	pure	realm	of	the	sky-farers.’	Focusing	intently	and	one-pointedly	on	the
divine	[maṇḍala	of]	awareness	holders,	recite	the	following	aspirational	prayer:
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual	tendencies,
May	the	divine	assembly	of	awareness	holders	attend	to	me
And	lead	me	on	the	path,	with	great	love.
May	 the	 assembly	 of	 spiritual	 heroes	 and	 awareness	 holders	 draw	 me
forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	[the	luminance	of]	coemergent	pristine	cognition.
May	the	supreme	consorts,	the	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	[sacred]	pure	realm	of	the	sky-farers.
	
By	making	this	aspirational	prayer	with	fervent	devotion,	you	will	dissolve	into
rainbow	light,	in	the	heart	of	the	divine	assembly	of	the	awareness	holders,	and
thereafter,	undoubtedly,	be	born	into	the	pure-realm	of	the	sky-farers.
	
All	types	of	spiritual	friend	can	attain	recognition	at	this	stage,	and	[thus]	they
will	 attain	 liberation.	 There	 is	 no	 doubt	 that	 even	 those	 with	 negative
propensities	can	attain	liberation	at	this	point.
This	 concludes	 the	 first	 part	 of	 the	
Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing
,	 the
introduction	to	inner	radiance	in	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	and
the	introduction	to	the	peaceful	deities	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.
	
ITI!	SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya!

PART	TWO
An	Elucidation	of	the	Appearance	of	the	Wrathful	Deities	in	the
Intermediate	State	of	Reality
Herein	is	contained	
An	Elucidation	of	the	Arising	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	the
Wrathful	Deities.
1
INTRODUCTION
Now,	the	way	in	which	the	intermediate	state	of	the	wrathful	deities	arises
should	be	presented.	In	the	previous	intermediate	state	of	the	peaceful	deities
there	 were	 seven	 successive	 [critical	 or]	 dangerous	 pathways.	 By	 receiving
introduction	to	these	sequentially,	even	though	one	might	not	have	attained
recognition	at	one	[critical	pathway],	one	should	have	attained	recognition	at
another.	Those	who	have	achieved	liberation	[in	this	way]	are	countless.
Yet,	although	many	have	been	liberated	through	such	[introductions	to	the
nature	of	reality],	sentient	beings	are	numerous.	Evil	past	actions	are	very	potent.
Negative	obscurations	are	dense.	Habitual	tendencies	are	long	lasting.	The	cycle
of	 ignorance	 and	 bewilderment	 is	 inexhaustible	 and	 undiminishing.	 Despite
having	received	introduction	in	such	detail,	there	are	still	a	large	number	who
roam	downwards,	not	having	achieved	liberation.
Now,	after	the	invitation	of	the	assembly	of	the	peaceful	deities,	and	the	divine
assembly	of	the	awareness	holders	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	has	passed,	the	blazing	assembly
of	 the	 fifty-eight	 wrathful	 blood-drinking	 deities,	 who	 are	 a	 natural
transformation	 of	 the	 above	 assembly	 of	 peaceful	 deities,	 will	 arise.	 These
deities	will	be	very	dissimilar	[in	appearance]	to	the	peaceful	deities.	This	is	the
intermediate	state	of	the	wrathful	deities	and,	[consequently,	as	the	deceased	will
be]	overpowered	by	fear,	terror	or	awe,	recognition	also	becomes	more	difficult.
Uncontrollably,	awareness	continually	
faints.	But,	nevertheless,	if	there	is	even
the	slightest	recognition,	liberation	is	easy.	Should	you	ask	why	this	is	so	-	it	is
because	 once	 the	 awesome,	 terrifying	 and	 fearful	 appearances	 arise,	 the

awareness	 does	 not	 have	 the	 luxury	 of	 distraction.	 The	 awareness	 is	 one-
pointedly	concentrated.
If,	at	this	stage,	oral	instructions	such	as	those	which	follow	[have	not	been
previously	introduced,	or]	are	not	now	introduced,	even	though	one’s	studies
may	have	been	ocean-like,	they	will	be	of	no	benefit	here.	Even	the	preceptors
[of	monasteries]	who	uphold	the	monastic	disciplines	and	great	teachers	of
dialectics	[who	have	not	been	previously	introduced]	will	be	bewildered	on	this
occasion,	and	fail	to	attain	recognition.	Consequently,	they	will	continue	to	roam
in	cyclic	existence.	This	is	even	more	so	for	ordinary	persons:	fleeing	in	awe,
terror	and	fear,	they	will	fall	into	the	abyss	of	lower	existences	and	suffer
miserably.	However,	even	the	most	inferior	of	yogins	who	has	practised	the	way
of	secret	mantra,	will	immediately,	upon	seeing	the	assembled	blood-drinking
deities,	 recognise	 them	 to	 be	 meditational	 deities,	 as	 if	 meeting	 old
acquaintances.	Trusting	in	them,	the	yogin	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[into	the
meditational	deities]	and	attain	buddhahood.
The	crucial	point	is	indeed	that	those	in	this	world	who	have,	[prior	to	death],
meditated	on	the	formal	description	of	these	blood-drinking	buddha-bodies,	and
also	made	offerings	and	praises	to	them,	or,	at	the	very	least,	have	simply	seen
their	painted	and	sculpted	images,	may	recognise	the	forms	that	arise	here	and
attain	liberation.
Moreover,	when	those	preceptors	who	uphold	the	monastic	disciplines	and	the
teachers	of	dialectics	[who	have	not	been	introduced]	die,	however	great	their
perseverance	was	in	religious	conduct	or	however	learned	they	were	in	their
exegetical	doctrines	within	the	human	world,	no	[auspicious]	signs,	such	as
major	or	minor	bone	relics	or	rainbow	light,	will	appear.
2
	Since	they	did	not	take
the	way	of	secret	mantra	to	heart	while	they	were	alive,	but	instead	deprecated
the	secret	mantra,	and	failed	to	become	acquainted	[in	life]	with	the	assembled
deities	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra,	they	will	not	recognise	the	[luminosities	and
deities]	when	they	arise	in	the	intermediate	state.	Suddenly	seeing	something
they	had	not	previously	seen,	they	will	develop	an	attitude	of	aversion	and
become	hostile.	Consequently	they	will	proceed	into	
lower	existences.	This	[lack
of	familiarity	and	the	arousal	of	aversion]	is	the	reason	why	[auspicious]	signs,
such	as	major	or	minor	bone	relics,	and	rainbow	light,	do	not	occur	in	the	case	of
those	upholders	of	monastic	discipline	and	dialectical	philosophers,	however
excellent	they	may	have	been,	who	have	not	taken	to	heart	and	experientially
cultivated	the	way	of	secret	mantra.
On	the	other	hand,	practitioners	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra,	even	if	they	are

the	lowest	of	the	low,	however	coarsely	[they	behaved]	in	the	world,	or	however
unrefined	and	uncultured	they	were,	and	however	unseemly	and	inelegant	their
conduct,	even	if	they	have	not	been	able	to	experientially	cultivate	the	way	of
secret	mantra	successfully,	will	attain	liberation	in	this	instance,	simply	because
they	have	not	embraced	a	mistaken	view,	and	are	without	doubt,	and	are	devoted
to	the	secret	mantra.	Even	if	such	an	individual’s	conduct	in	the	human	world
was	inelegant,	at	least	one	[auspicious]	indication,	such	as	major	and	minor
relics,	images	or	rainbow	light,	will	occur	at	the	moment	of	death.	This	is
because	the	way	of	secret	mantra	carries	an	extremely	great	blessing.
Yogins	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra	who	are	above	average	capacity,	who	have
experientially	cultivated	the	meditations	of	both	the	generation	and	perfection
stages	and	[practised]	the	recitation	of	the	heart-mantras,	and	so	on,	do	not	need
to	roam	downwards	this	far	into	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.	As	soon	as
respiration	ceases,	they	will	certainly	be	invited	to	the	pure	realm	of	the	sky-
farers	by	the	awareness	holders,	heroes	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s.	As	an	indication	of	this,
[one	or	more	of]	the	following	signs	will	occur:	the	sky	will	become	cloudless;
[the	body]	will	merge	into	rainbows	and	lights;	a	shower	of	flowers	will	fall;
there	will	be	the	fragrance	of	perfume	[in	the	air]	and	the	sound	of	music	in	the
sky;	while	rays	of	light,	major	and	minor	relics,	images,	rainbow	lights,	and	so
forth	will	appear	[in	the	funeral	pyre].
3
So	it	is	that,	for	the	upholders	of	the	monastic	disciplines	and	teachers	[of
dialectics	who	have	not	been	previously	introduced],	and	for	practitioners	of	the
way	of	secret	mantra	whose	commitments	have	degenerated,	and	for	all	ordinary
persons,	this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
	is	indispensable.
Those	serious	meditators	who	have	meditated	on	[the	practices	of]	the	Great
Perfection	and	the	Great	Seal	will	recognise	the	inner	radiance	that	dawns	during
the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	and	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality.	For	these	
meditators	there	is	absolutely	no	need	to	read	this	
Liberation
by	Hearing
.
[In	 summary],	 if	 individuals	 recognise	 the	 inner	 radiance	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	they	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality.	If	they	achieve	recognition	during	this	intermediate	state	of	reality,	when
the	visions	 of	 the	Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	Deities	 arise,	they	will	 attain	 the
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource.	 If	 they	 achieve	 recognition	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth,	they	will	attain	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation.
Alternatively,	at	the	very	least,	[individuals	who	have	heard	this	teaching]	will
be	born	into	the	higher	existences,	where,	based	on	the	residual	potency	of	their

past	actions,	they	will	again	meet	with,	and	be	able	to	practise,	this	[sacred]
teaching	in	the	next	life.
Since	[this	sacred	teaching	is	based	on	recognition	in	the	intermediate	states]
this	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
	is	the	teaching	whereby	buddhahood	can	be
attained	without	meditation.	It	is	the	teaching	whereby	liberation	can	be	attained
just	by	its	being	heard,	it	is	the	teaching	whereby	those	that	are	the	most	negative
are	led	onto	the	secret	path,
4
	it	is	the	teaching	whereby	essential	points	[of
discrimination]	are	instantly	grasped,	and	it	is	the	profound	teaching	whereby
perfect	buddhahood	is	instantaneously	attained.	Thus,	it	is	impossible	for	those
sentient	beings	who	have	been	engaged	by	this	teaching	to	fall	into	lower
existences.	This	[
Liberation	by	Hearing
]	and	the	[related]	
Liberation	by	Wearing
should	be	read	aloud	together,	since	[their	conjunction]	is	like	a	maṇḍala	of	gold,
inlaid	with	turquoise	ornaments.
5
MAIN	SUBJECT	MATTER
Having	outlined	in	this	way	the	essential	purpose	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
,
[the	deceased]	should	now	be	introduced	to	the	arising	of	the	intermediate	state
of	the	wrathful	deities.
Again,	 you	 should	 call	 the	 deceased	 by	 name,	 three	 times,	 and	 say	 the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	Although	the	intermediate
state	 of	 the	 peaceful	 deities	 did	 previously	 arise	 within	 you,	 you	 did	 not
recognise	it.	So	now	you	have	wandered,	[through	the	succession	of	pathways,]
to	here.	Now,	on	the	eighth	
day,	the	assembly	of	wrathful	blood-drinking	deities
will	arise.	Recognise	them	and	do	not	be	distracted!	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
he	 who	 is	 called	 Great	 Glorious	 Buddha	 Heruka	 will	 [now]	 arise,	 vividly
manifesting	before	you	from	within	your	own	brain.	His	body,	blazing	in	a	mass
of	light,	is	dark	brown	in	colour,	having	three	heads,	six	arms	and	four	legs,
which	are	[firmly]	set	apart.	His	right	face	is	white,	the	left	red	and	the	central
face	dark	brown.	His	nine	eyes	are	fixed	in	a	fearsome	wrathful	gaze,	his
eyebrows	are	quivering	like	lightning,	his	fangs	are	bared	and	gleaming,	and	he
is	laughing	loudly,	uttering	the	sounds	of	Alala	and	Haha,	and	Shoo	oo	-	like
whistles,	in	loud	piercing	cries.	The	golden-auburn	hair	of	his	head	blazes	and

rears	upward,	sun	and	moon-discs,	black	serpents	and	dry	skulls	adorn	each	of
his	heads,	and	black	snakes	and	fresh	skulls	form	a	garland	around	his	body.	In
his	six	hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	wheel,	in	the	middle	one,
an	axe	and	in	the	last	hand	a	sword	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand,	he	holds	a
bell,	in	the	middle	one,	a	ploughshare	and	in	the	last	a	skull.	The	female	consort
Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around	his
neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.	Amidst	loud
pounding	 palatal	 sounds	 of	 ‘Thuk-chom’,	 and	 an	 [echoing]	 roar	 like	 the
reverberation	of	thunder,	the	fire	of	pristine	cognition	blazes	from	the	fiery
indestructible	pores	of	their	bodies,	and	thus	they	stand	together,	[with	one	leg]
extended	and	[the	other]	drawn	in,	on	a	throne	supported	by	garuḍas.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	 the	 buddha-body	 of	 your	 own	 intrinsic	 awareness.	 These	 are	 your	 own
meditational	deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,	is	the	transcendent
lord	Vairocana	and	his	consort,	so	do	not	be	afraid.	Recognition	and	liberation
will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[within	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood
in	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
Yet	should	[the	deceased],	once	again,	flee	in	awe	and	terror	and	thereby	not
attain	recognition,	then,	on	the	ninth	day,	the	Vajra	family	of	blood-drinking
deities	will	come	to	escort	him	or	her.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	He	who	is	called	the
transcendent	lord	Vajra	Heruka,	of	the	Vajra	family	of	blood-drinking	deities,
will	arise	from	the	eastern	direction	of	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	His
body	is	dark	blue	in	colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set
apart.	His	right	face	is	white,	the	left	red	and	the	central	face	is	blue.	In	his	six
hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	vajra,	in	the	middle	one,	a	skull-
cup	and	in	the	last	hand	an	axe,	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand,	he	holds	a	bell,
in	the	middle	one,	a	skull-cup	and	in	the	last	a	ploughshare.	The	female	consort
Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around	his	neck
and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to

be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are	your	own	meditational
deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,	is	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva
and	his	consort,	so	do	not	fear	them.	Be	devoted	to	them!	Recognition	and
liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource.
Yet,	if	those	individuals	who	are	greatly	obscured	by	past	actions,	again	flee	in
awe	and	terror	and	thereby	do	not	attain	recognition,	then	on	the	tenth	day,	the
Ratna	family	of	blood-drinking	deities	will	come	to	escort	them.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	On	the	tenth	day,	he	who
is	called	Ratna	Heruka,	of	the	Ratna	family	of	blood-drinking	deities,	will	arise
from	the	southern	direction	of	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	His	body	is
dark	yellow	in	colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set	apart.
His	right	face	is	white,	the	left	red,	and	the	central	face	is	a	burning	dark	yellow.
In	his	six	hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	
hand,	a	jewel,	in	the	middle
one,	a	khaṭvāṅga	and	in	the	last	hand	a	club	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand,	he
holds	a	bell,	in	the	middle	one,	a	skull-cup	and	in	the	last	a	trident.	The	female
consort	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around
his	neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are	your	own	meditational
deities,	 so	 do	 not	 be	 terrified.	 This,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Ratnasambhava	 and	 his	 consort,	 so	 be	 devoted	 to	 them!	 Recognition	 and
liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	[in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource].
Yet,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	there	are	those	who,	owing	to	their
negative	 habitual	 tendencies,	 will	 nevertheless	 flee	 in	 awe	 and	 terror.	 Not
recognising	their	own	meditational	deities,	they	will	perceive	them	as	Yama	and
thereby	the	recognition	will	not	occur.	So	it	is	that,	on	the	eleventh	day,	the

assembled	deities	of	the	Padma	family	of	blood-drinking	deities	will	come	to
escort	the	deceased.
Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction	should	be	given	with
the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	[listen	without	distraction].	On	the	eleventh	day,	he
who	is	called	the	transcendent	lord	Padma	Heruka,	of	the	Padma	family	of
blood-drinking	deities,	will	arise	from	the	western	direction	of	your	brain,	in
union	with	his	consort,	and	appear	vividly	before	you.	His	body	is	dark	red	in
colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set	apart.	His	right	face
is	white,	the	left	blue,	and	the	central	face	is	dark	red.	In	his	six	hands	he	holds,
on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	lotus,	in	the	middle	one,	a	khaṭvāṅga	and	in	the
last	hand	a	mace	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand	he	holds	a	bell,	in	the	middle
one,	a	blood-filled	skull	and	in	the	last	a	small	drum.	The	female	consort
Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around	his
neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Contemplate	them
with	joy.	Recognise	this	to	be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are
your	own	meditational	deities,	so	do	not	be	terrified.	This,	in	reality,	is	the
transcendent	lord	Amitābha	and	his	consort,	so	be	devoted	to	them!	Recognition
and	liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	[in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource].
Yet,	even	after	receiving	this	introduction,	there	are	those	who	are	held	back
by	their	negative	habitual	tendencies	and	there	are	those	who	will	not	recognise
their	 meditational	 deities	 because	 they	 have	 fled	 in	 awe	 and	 terror.	 The
recognition	 not	 having	 been	 attained,	 so	 it	 is	 that,	 on	 the	 twelfth	 day,	 the
assembled	deities	of	the	Karma	family	of	blood-drinking	deities,	followed	by	the
Gaur
ῑ
,	the	Piśāc
ῑ
,	the	Female	Gatekeepers,	and	the	Īśvar
ῑ
,	will	come	to	escort	the
deceased.	 Since	 an	 even	 greater	 fear	 and	 terror	 will	 arise	 if	 these	 are	 not
recognised,	again,	call	the	deceased	by	name,	and	offer	the	introduction	in	the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction.	When	the	twelfth	day
comes,	he	who	is	called	the	transcendent	lord	Karma	Heruka,	of	the	Karma

family	of	blood-drinking	deities,	will	arise	from	the	northern	direction	of	your
brain,	in	union	with	his	consort,	and	appear	vividly	before	you.	His	body	is	dark
green	in	colour,	with	three	faces,	six	arms	and	four	legs,	[firmly]	set	apart.	His
right	face	is	white,	the	left	red,	and	the	central	face	is	an	awesome	dark	green.	In
his	six	hands	he	holds,	on	the	right	in	the	first	hand,	a	sword,	in	the	middle	one,
a	khaṭvāṅga	and	in	the	last	hand	a	mace	and	to	the	left,	in	his	first	hand	he	holds
a	bell,	in	the	middle	one,	a	skull	and	in	the	last	a	ploughshare.	The	female
consort	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ
	is	embracing	his	body,	her	right	hand	clasped	around
his	neck	and	her	left	offering	a	skull-cup	filled	with	blood	to	his	mouth.
Do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	And	do	not	be	awed!	Recognise	this	to
be	the	buddha-body	of	your	own	awareness.	These	are	your	own	meditational
deities,	 so	 do	 not	 be	 terrified.	 This,	 in	 reality,	 is	 the	 transcendent	 lord
Amoghasiddhi	 and	 his	
consort,	 so	 regard	 them	 with	 intense	 devotion!
Recognition	and	liberation	will	occur	simultaneously!
	
If,	upon	hearing	these	words,	[the	deceased]	recognises	the	meditational	deities,
he	or	she	will	dissolve	indivisibly	[with	them]	and	thereby	attain	buddhahood	[in
the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource].
Based	on	the	spiritual	teacher’s	[former]	oral	instruction,	as	one	recognises
these	[visionary	appearances]	as	the	natural	expressive	power	of	awareness,
naturally	manifesting,	liberation	will	occur.	This	is	like	one	who	recognises	a
stuffed	lion-skin	to	be	a	stuffed	lion.	The	nature	of	the	stuffed	lion	is	such	that	if
its	actual	nature	is	not	recognised	it	will	generate	awe	and	terror.	But,	as	soon	as
someone	points	out	what	this	really	is,	the	façade	is	penetrated,	and	the	fear
dissolves.	Similarly,	here,	when	the	assembly	of	blood-drinking	deities	arises,
with	their	huge	bodies	and	thick	limbs,	filling	the	whole	of	space,	[the	deceased]
undoubtedly	becomes	awed	and	terrified.	But,	immediately	upon	hearing	this
introduction,	 the	 deceased	 will	 recognise	 the	 appearances	 to	 be	 natural
manifestations	[of	actual	reality],	or	to	be	their	own	meditational	deities.	[As	this
recognition	 occurs,]	 the	 two	 [aspects	 of	 inner	 radiance],	 the	 ‘mother	 inner
radiance’,	 which	 was	 formerly	 [introduced]	 through	 the	 spiritual	 teacher’s
guidance,	and	the	‘naturally	arising	child	inner	radiance’,	[the	experience	of]
which	emerges	subsequently	[as	the	result	of	practice],	meet	together	-	in	other
words,	like	meeting	an	old	friend,	[the	inner	radiance]	that	dawns	face	to	face
with	oneself	does	so	in	a	naturally	liberating	manner	and	one	will	be	naturally
freed	within	[the	expanse	of]	naturally	radiant	intrinsic	awareness.
If	this	introduction	is	not	received,	even	good	persons	may	turn	away	at	this

point	and	continue	to	roam	within	cyclic	existence.	[As	this	occurs]	then,	the
female	wrathful	deities,	the	eight	Gaur
ῑ
,	and	the	eight	Piśāc
ῑ
,	[the	latter]	having
diverse	[animal]	heads,	will	emerge	from	within	the	brain	[of	the	deceased],	and
appear	before	him	or	her.	Again,	calling	the	deceased	by	name,	the	introduction
should	be	given	in	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction!	The	eight	Gaur
ῑ
	will	now
be	emerging	from	within	your	own	brain	and	appearing	before	you.	Do	not	be
afraid!	From	the	eastern	direction	
of	your	brain	the	white	Gaur
ῑ
,	holding	a
human	corpse	as	a	cudgel	in	her	right	hand	and	a	blood-filled	skull	in	her	left
hand,	will	arise	before	you.	Do	not	be	afraid!	From	the	southern	direction,	the
yellow	Caur
ῑ
,	shooting	an	arrow	from	a	bow;	from	the	west,	the	red	Pramohā,
holding	a	crocodile	victory-banner;	and	from	the	north,	the	black	Vetāl
ῑ
,	holding
a	vajra	and	a	blood-filled	skull,	[will	arise].	From	the	south-east,	the	red-yellow
Pukkas
ῑ
,	holding	entrails	in	her	right	[hand]	and	eating	them	with	her	left;	from
the	south-west,	the	green-black	Ghasmar
ῑ
,	holding	a	blood-filled	skull	in	her	left
[hand],	stirring	this	with	a	vajra	in	her	right	hand	and	drinking	awesomely;
from	the	north-west,	the	white-yellow	Caṇḍāl
ῑ
,	tearing	apart	the	head	and	body
[of	a	bloated	corpse],	holding	the	heart	in	her	right	hand	and	eating	the	body
with	her	left;	and	from	the	north-east,	the	blue-black	Śmaśān
ῑ
,	tearing	a	head
and	body	apart	and	eating	them,	[will	arise].	These	eight	Gaur
ῑ
,	who	are
indicative	of	the	[eight]	classes	[of	consciousness],	will	emerge	from	within	your
own	brain,	and	surround	the	five	blood-drinking	deities	and	their	consorts.	Do
not	be	afraid!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	without	distraction!	The	eight	Piśāc
ῑ
,	who
are	 indicative	 of	 the	 sense	 objects,	 will	 emerge,	 and	 appear	 before	 you,
encircling	this	array.	From	the	east,	the	dark	brown	Siṃhamukh
ῑ
,	lion-headed,
her	two	arms	crossed	on	her	breast,	carrying	a	corpse	in	her	mouth	and	shaking
her	mane;	from	the	south,	tiger-headed,	the	red	Vyāghr
ῑ
mukh
ῑ
,	her	two	arms
crossed,	snarling	and	staring	with	bulging	eyes;	from	the	west,	fox-headed,	the
black	Śṛgālamukh
ῑ
,	holding	a	razor	in	her	right	hand,	and	entrails	in	her	left,
eating	the	entrails	and	licking	the	blood;	from	the	north,	wolf-headed,	the	black-
blue	Śvānamukh
ῑ
,	tearing	apart	a	corpse	with	her	two	arms	and	staring	with
bulging	 eyes;	 from	 the	 south-east,	 vulture-headed,	 the	 white-yellow
Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
,	carrying	a	large	human	corpse	over	her	shoulder	and	holding	a
skeleton	 in	 [both]	 hands;	 from	 the	 south-west,	 kite-headed,	 the	 black-red
Kaṅkamukh
ῑ
,	carrying	a	large	corpse	over	her	shoulders;	from	the	north-west,

crow-headed,	the	black	Kākamukh
ῑ
,	holding	a	skull	in	her	left	[hand],	a	sword	in
her	right,	and	eating	a	[human]	heart	and	lungs;	and	from	the	north-east,	owl-
headed,	 the	 blue-black	 Ulūkamukh
ῑ
,	 holding	 a	 vajra	 in	 her	 right	 [hand],
wielding	a	sword	in	her	left	and	eating	flesh.	These,	the	eight	Piśāc
ῑ
,	indicative
of	the	sense	objects,	will	emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	arise	before	you,
encircling	the	five	blood-drinking	
deities	and	their	consorts.	Do	not	be	afraid!
Recognise	 all	 that	 arises	 as	 the	 natural	 expressive	 power	 of	 awareness,
manifesting	naturally.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	the	four	Female	Gatekeepers	will	also	emerge
from	 within	 your	 brain	 and	 appear	 before	 you.	 Recognise	 them!	 From	 the
eastern	direction	of	your	brain	the	white	horse-headed	Aṅkuśā,	a	blood-filled
skull	in	her	left	hand;	from	the	south,	the	yellow	sow-headed	Pāśā,	holding	a
noose;	from	the	west,	the	red	lion-headed	Sphoṭā,	holding	an	iron	chain;	and
from	 the	 north,	 the	 green	 snake-headed	 Ghaṇṭā,	 holding	 a	 bell,	 will
instantaneously	arise.
6
	
These,	the	four	Female	Gatekeepers,	will	indeed	emerge
from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	Recognise	them,	as	they	are	your
own	meditational	deities!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	on	the	periphery	of	these	thirty	deities,	who	are
the	wrathful	Herukas	[and	their	retinues],	the	twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
	will	emerge
from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	They	will	have	diverse	[animal]
heads	and	bear	diverse	weapons.	But,	do	not	be	afraid!	Recognise	all	that	arises
as	the	natural	expressive	power	of	awareness,	manifesting	naturally.	Now,	at	this
most	critical	point,	remember	your	spiritual	teacher’s	oral	instructions.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	from	the	east,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	of	the	east	will
emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	the	brownish	white	yak-
headed	Manurākṣas
ῑ
,	holding	[a	vajra	and]	a	skull;	the	yellowish	white	snake-
headed	Brahmāṇ
ῑ
,	holding	a	lotus;	the	greenish	white	leopard-headed	Raudr
ῑ
,
holding	a	trident;	the	bluish	white	weasel-headed	Vaiṣṇāv
ῑ
,	holding	a	wheel;	the
reddish	white	brown-bear-headed	Kaumār
ῑ
,	holding	a	pike;	and	the	white	black-
bear-headed	Indrāṇ
ῑ
,	holding	a	noose	of	entrails	in	her	hand.
7
	
Do	not	be	afraid!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	from	the	south,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	of	the	south	will
emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	the	yellow	bat-headed
8
Piṅgalā,	holding	a	razor;	the	reddish	yellow	crocodile-headed	Śānt
ῑ
,	holding	a
vase;	the	reddish	yellow	scorpion-headed	Amṛtā,	holding	a	lotus;	the	whitish
yellow	hawk-headed	Saum
ῑ
,	holding	a	vajra;	the	greenish	yellow	fox-headed
Daṇḍ
ῑ
,	holding	a	cudgel,	and	the	blackish	yellow	tiger-headed	Rākṣas
ῑ
	holding	a

blood-filled	skull	in	her	hand.
9
	
Do	not	be	afraid!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	from	the	west,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	of	the	west	will
emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	
the	greenish	red	vulture-
headed	Bhakṣas
ῑ
,	holding	a	club;	the	red	horse-headed	Rat
ῑ
,	holding	a	large
torso;	 the	 pale	 red	 garuḍaheaded	 mighty	 one	 [Rudhiramad
ῑ
,	 consort	 of
Mahābala],	holding	a	cudgel;	the	red	dog-headed	[Ekacāriṇ
ῑ
]	Rākṣas
ῑ
,	wielding
a	vajra-razor	in	her	hand;	the	red	hoopoe-headed	Manohārikā,	firing	an	arrow
from	a	bow;	and	the	greenish	red	deer-headed	protectress	of	wealth,	[Siddhikar
ῑ
,
consort	of	Vasurakṣita],	holding	a	vase	in	her	hand.
10
	
Do	not	be	afraid!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	from	the	north,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	of	the	north	will
emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	the	bluish	green	snake-
headed	Vāyudev
ῑ
,	brandishing	an	ensign;	the	reddish	green	ibex-headed	Agnāy
ῑ
,
holding	a	glowing	fire-brand;	the	blackish	green	sow-headed	Varāh
ῑ
,	holding	a
noose	of	fangs;	the	reddish	green	crow-headed	Vajrā	[Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ
],	holding	an
infant	human	corpse;	the	blackish	green	elephant-headed	Bhujanā,	holding	a
club	and	drinking	blood	[from	a	skull];	and	the	bluish	green	snake-headed
Varuṇān
ῑ
,	holding	a	noose	of	snakes	in	her	hand.
11
	
Do	not	be	afraid!
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 the	 four	 yogin
ῑ
	 who	 are	 the	 [four]	 female
gatekeepers	will	emerge	from	within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you:	from	the
east,	the	white	cuckoo-headed	Vajrā	[Mahākāl
ῑ
],	holding	an	iron	hook;	from	the
south,	the	yellow	goat-headed	Vajrā	[Mahāchāgalā],	holding	a	noose;	from	the
west,	the	red	lion-headed	Vajrā	[Mahākumbhakarṇ
ῑ
],	holding	an	iron	chain;	and
from	the	north,	the	black-green	snake-headed	Vajrā	[Lambodarā],	holding	a	bell
in	her	hand.	These	four	yogin
ῑ
,	the	female	gatekeepers,	will	indeed	emerge	from
within	your	brain	and	appear	before	you.	Do	not	be	afraid!
Since	these	twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
	emanate	naturally	from	the	expressive	power
of	the	naturally	arising	deities,	which	are	the	wrathful	Herukas	-	recognise	them
now!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	through	the	expressive	power	of	emptiness,	the
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality	 has	 arisen	 as	 the	 peaceful	 deities,	 recognise	 this!
Through	the	expressive	power	of	radiance,	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
has	arisen	as	the	wrathful	deities.
12
	
Recognise	this!
At	 this	 time,	 when	 the	 assembly	 of	 the	 fifty-eight	 blood-drinking	 deities
manifests	from	within	your	brain,	you	should	recognise	all	that	arises	as	the
naturally	 arising	 luminosity	 of	 your	 own	 awareness.	
Then,	 [if	 recognition
occurs],	you	will	immediately	attain	buddhahood,	inseparable	from	the	blood-

drinking	deities.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	even	now	you	do	not	recognise	this	[reality],
and	become	afraid	and	turn	away	from	the	[visionary	appearances],	you	will	go
on	to	experience	yet	further	suffering.	If	recognition	does	not	occur,	all	the
blood-drinking	deities	will	be	perceived	as	Yama.	You	will	be	overwhelmed	by
fear,	by	awe	and	by	terror	at	[the	sight	of]	all	the	blood-drinking	deities;	and
you	will	faint.	Those	[visionary	appearances],	which	are	natural	manifestations
[of	actual	reality],	will	[seem	to]	have	become	demons,	and	you	will	continue	to
roam	in	cyclic	existence.	But	[even	now],	if	you	are	not	awed	and	not	terrified,
you	will	avoid	the	continued	wandering	within	cyclic	existence.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	the	largest	of	the	buddha-bodies	of	the	Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities	will	be	as	vast	as	the	sky;	the	medium	ones	will	be	the	size
of	Mount	Sumeru;	and	even	the	smallest	will	be	the	size	of	eighteen	of	our
bodies,	standing	one	above	the	other.
13
	
Do	not	be	afraid!	All	phenomenal
existence	is	now	arising	as	luminosities	and	buddha-bodies.	By	recognising	all
the	present	visionary	appearances	to	be	the	natural	luminosity	of	your	own
intrinsic	awareness,	manifesting	as	lights	and	buddha-bodies,	you	will	dissolve
inseparably	 within	 the	 lights	 and	 buddha-bodies,	 and	 buddhahood	 will	 be
attained.	 O	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 whatever	 fearsome	 and	 terrifying
apparitions	appear	to	you	now,	recognise	them	to	be	natural	manifestations	[of
actual	 reality].	 Do	 not	 be	 afraid!	 Recognise	 these	 [appearances]	 as	 inner
radiance,	your	own	natural	luminosity.	Upon	recognition,	you	will	undoubtedly
attain	 buddhahood,	 right	 now.	 That	 which	 is	 called	 ‘instantaneous	 perfect
buddhahood’	will	occur	at	this	very	moment.	Remember	this,	and	hold	it	in	your
mind!
Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	recognise	[the	visionary	appearances]
now,	and	continue	to	be	afraid,	then	all	the	buddha-bodies	of	the	peaceful	deities
will	arise	in	the	form	of	Mahākāla;	all	the	buddha-bodies	of	the	wrathful	deities
will	arise	in	the	form	of	Yama	Dharmarāja;	and	then	all	of	your	perceptions	will
turn	into	malevolent	forces.	In	this	way,	you	will	continue	to	wander	in	cyclic
existence.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	recognise	the	present	appearances
as	natural	manifestations	[of	actual	reality],	even	
though	you	may	have	been
learned	in	all	the	sūtras	and	tantras,	which	form	the	[Buddha’s]	transmitted
precepts,	and	even	though	you	may	have	practised	these	doctrines	for	an	aeon,
buddhahood	 will	 not	 be	 attained.	 Yet,	 if	 you	 recognise	 now	 the	 visionary
appearances	that	are	manifesting	naturally,	then,	through	[the	understanding	of]

a	single	essential	point,	and	through	[the	understanding	of]	a	single	word,	you
will	attain	buddhahood.
If,	immediately	after	death,	you	do	not	recognise	the	appearances	which
manifest	 naturally,	 these	 appearances	 will	 [eventually]	 arise	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	in	the	forms	of	Yama	Dharmarāja.	The	largest	form
assumed	by	Yama	Dharmarāja	is	as	vast	as	space;	the	medium	form,	the	size	of
Mount	Sumeru,	filling	this	world-system.	[Thus,	Yama	Dharmarāja	will	appear],
his	upper	teeth	biting	into	his	lower	lip,	his	eyes	glassy,	his	hair	tied	up	on	the
crown	of	his	head,	his	belly	bulging	and	his	neck	thin,	brandishing	in	his	hand
the	wooden	slate	[documenting]	past	actions	-	his	mouth	echoing	with	the	cries
of	‘strike!’,	and	‘kill!’	-	he	is	drinking	brains,	severing	heads	and	ripping	out
internal	organs.	In	this	way,	[it	will	appear	as	if	his	form]	fills	the	entire	world.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	when	such	visions	arise,	do	not	be	afraid	or
terrified.	Your	body	is	a	mental	body,	formed	of	habitual	tendencies.	Therefore,
even	if	you	are	slain	and	cut	into	pieces,	you	will	not	die.	You	are,	[in	reality],	a
natural	form	of	emptiness,	so	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	The	forms	of	Yama
Dharmarāja	 arise,	 too,	 from	 the	 natural	 luminosity	 of	 your	 own	 intrinsic
awareness.	They	have	no	material	substance.	Emptiness	cannot	be	harmed	by
emptiness.	[Clearly]	determine	now	that,	other	than	arising	from	the	natural
expressive	power	of	your	own	awareness,	[whatever	seems	to	appear	to	you]
externally	-	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	the	blood-drinking	[Herukas],	the
diverse	animal-headed	deities,	the	rainbow	lights,	the	frightening	forms	of	Yama,
etc.
	 -	 these	 are	 all	 without	 substantial	 existence.	 If	 this	 is	 successfully
determined,	all	fear	and	terror	will	be	liberated	[naturally],	just	where	it	is.	You
will	dissolve	inseparably	[with	the	visionary	appearances]	and	buddhahood	will
be	attained.
Upon	 recognising	 [the	 visionary	 appearances]	 in	 this	 way,	 be	 fervently
devoted,	and	think:	‘These	are	my	meditational	deities.	They	have	come	to	escort
me	on	the	dangerous	pathway	of	the	intermediate	state.	I	take	refuge	in	them.’
Remember	 the	 Three	
Precious	 Jewels!	 Remember	 your	 meditational	 deity,
whichever	it	may	be!	Call	to	your	meditational	deity	by	name	and	pray	with	the
following	words:	‘I	am	roaming	in	the	intermediate	state	-	come	quickly	to
rescue	me!	Hold	me	in	your	compassion,	O	precious	meditational	deity!’	Call	to
your	spiritual	teacher,	by	name,	and	pray	with	the	following	words:	‘I	am
roaming	in	the	intermediate	state.	Rescue	me!	Do	not	let	your	compassion
forsake	me!’	Pray	devotedly,	yet	again,	to	the	assembled	blood-drinking	deities
and	recite	this	aspirational	prayer:

	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence,	[driven]	by	deep-seated	habitual	tendencies,
May	the	assembly	of	[male]	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	transcendent
lords,	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	[radiant]	light,
Through	which	[all]	awesome	and	terrifying	perceptions	are	left	behind.
May	the	assembly	of	the	wrathful	female	deities,	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	[and	so	forth],
support	me	from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
Now,	when	I	roam	alone,	separated	from	my	loved	ones,
And	[myriad]	images	of	emptiness	arise,	naturally	manifesting,
May	the	buddhas	[quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	 may	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 awesome	 and	 terrifying	 intermediate	 state	 be
annulled.
	
When	the	five	radiant	lights	of	pristine	cognition	dawn,
May	I	recognise	them	as	my	own	[nature],	without	awe	and	without	terror,
And	as	the	[manifold]	forms	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise,
May	 I	 be	 fearlessly	 confident	 and	 recognise	 [the	 characteristics	 of]	 the
intermediate	state.
	
When	I	experience	suffering	as	the	result	of	negative	past	actions,
May	the	meditational	deities	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	all	[sounds]	be	heard	as	the	resonance	of	the	Six	Syllables.
	
When	I	am	driven	on	by	past	actions,	unable	to	find	a	refuge,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One,	Mahākāruṇika,	protect	me.
And	as	I	experience	the	suffering	of	habitual	tendencies	and	past	actions,
May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
	
May	the	fields	of	the	five	elements	not	rise	up	as	a	hostile	force,

And	may	I	see	[them	as]	the	fields	of	the	five	enlightened	families!
	
Recite	this	aspirational	prayer	with	deep	devotion.	It	is	very	important.	As	all
fear	and	terror	dissolve,	you	will	assuredly	attain	buddhahood	in	the	Buddha-
body	of	Perfect	Resource	-	so	do	not	be	distracted!
	
The	above	introduction	should	be	given	three	or	up	to	seven	times.	Even	if	the
negativity	of	the	deceased	is	very	great	and	even	if	the	inheritance	of	past	actions
is	very	bad,	it	is	impossible	for	liberation	not	to	occur	-	[if	there	is	recognition].
Yet,	regardless	of	how	often	these	teachings	are	given,	if	recognition	does	not
occur,	[the	deceased]	will	necessarily	roam	into	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
The	introduction	to	that	[state]	is	presented	below,	in	detail.
CONCLUSION	OF	THE	INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	INTERMEDIATE
STATE	OF	THE	TIME	OF	DEATH	AND	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE
OF	REALITY
Since	it	is	generally	the	case	that	one	will	experience	bewilderment	at	the	time	of
death,	this	
Liberation	by	Hearing
	is	indispensable,	whatever	one’s	degree	of
familiarity	 with	 [meditative]	 practices.	 In	
the	 case	 of	 those	 who	 have
considerable	 familiarity	 with	 [meditative]	 experience	 the	 recognition	 of	 the
nature	of	reality	can	arise	instantly,	as	soon	as	awareness	separates	from	the
material	body.	Therefore,	it	is	essential	to	cultivate	this	experience	[of	reality]
during	 one’s	 lifetime.	 Those	 who	 have	 been	 introduced	 to	 [the	 nature	 of]
awareness,	 directly,	 and	 who	 have	 cultivated	 [this	 aspect	 of	 meditative
experience]	 during	 their	 lifetime,	 will	 have	 the	 greatest	 ability	 during	 the
intermediate	 state	 of	 the	 time	 of	 death	 when	 the	 inner	 radiance	 arises.
Additionally,	those	who	during	their	lifetime	emphasised	meditation	on	the	deity,
according	to	the	generation	and	perfection	stages	of	the	way	of	secret	mantra,
will	have	the	greatest	ability	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,	when	the
visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise.
Given	the	above,	it	is	extremely	important	to	train	the	mind	particularly	in	this
Liberation	by	Hearing
,	while	one	is	alive.	It	should	be	embraced.	It	should	be
read	aloud.	It	should	be	thoroughly	comprehended.	It	should	be	taken	to	heart
perfectly.	It	should	be	read	aloud	three	times	[a	day],	without	fail.	Its	words	and
meaning	should	be	so	clearly	impressed	on	the	mind	that,	even	were	one	to	be

pursued	by	a	hundred	assassins,	its	text	and	meaning	would	not	be	forgotten.
This	being	called	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	even	those	who	have
committed	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	will	attain	liberation	upon	hearing	[a
recitation	of	its	words].	Therefore,	it	should	be	read	aloud	in	public	places.	It
should	be	propagated.	Since	the	awareness	becomes	many	times	clearer	during
the	intermediate	state,	even	if	this	teaching	is	sensed,	as	now,	only	once,	and
even	if	its	meaning	is	not	understood,	it	will	be	remembered	at	the	time	[of
death],	without	a	single	word	being	forgotten.	Therefore	it	should	be	read	aloud
to	the	ears	of	all	during	their	lifetime.	It	should	be	read	aloud	across	the	pillows
of	all	who	are	sick.	It	should	be	read	aloud	in	the	presence	of	all	the	bodies	of
the	dead.	It	should	be	propagated,	far	and	wide.
To	meet	with	this	[teaching]	is	a	great	good	fortune.	Except	for	those	who
have	gathered	the	accumulations	[of	merit	and	pristine	cognition],	and	purified
their	obscurations,	it	is	difficult	to	encounter.	Yet,	once	it	is	heard,	liberation	can
be	achieved	just	by	avoiding	a	mistaken	view.
14
	Therefore	it	should	be	greatly
cherished.	It	is	the	essence	of	all	teachings.
This	completes	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	
reality,	which
forms	part	of	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	the
teaching	on	the	intermediate	states	which	liberates	just	by	being	heard,	or	just	by
being	seen.
COLOPHON
This	teaching	was	brought	forth	in	secret	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma
Lingpa,	the	eldest	son	of	the	accomplished	master	Nyinda	Sangye,	from	the
sacred	place	of	Mount	Gampodar,	which	resembles	a	dancing	god,	and	is	located
on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 river	 Serden.	 The	 master	 Karma	 Lingpa	 entrusted	 its
transmitted	precepts	and	authorisation	to	his	son,	Choje	Lingpa.	The	succession
fell	 in	 turn	 to	 his	 [son]	 Guru	 Suryacandra	 [i.e.	 Lama	 Nyinda]	 and,	 in	 his
presence,	I	Gaganadharmasamudra	[i.e.	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso]	received	it	with
devotion.

PART	THREE
An	Elucidation	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
Herein	is	contained	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	an	introduction	to	and
elucidation	of	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,	[which	is	an	extract	from]	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention.
1
	
I	 bow	 with	 respect	 to	 the	 spiritual	 teachers,	 and	 assembled	 meditational
deities.
May	they	effect	liberation	in	the	intermediate	state!
	
From	within	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
,	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
has	already	been	presented.	Here	then	follows	that	which	is	known	as	the
elucidation	of	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
[INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	MENTAL	BODY]
Although	the	elucidation	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	has	already	been
given	many	times,	with	the	exception	of	those	who	are	greatly	experienced	in	the
meditations	 of	 the	 [sacred]	 teachings	 and	 those	 who	 have	 an	 excellent
inheritance	 of	 past	 actions,	 it	 is	 difficult	 for	 those	 lacking	 familiarity	 with
meditative	experience	and	those	with	a	negative	disposition	to	attain	recognition,
on	account	of	the	fear	and	terror	[induced	by]	negative	past	actions.	Therefore,
from	the	tenth	day	onwards,	these	individuals	should	once	again	be	reminded	[of
the	nature	of	this	intermediate	state],	through	the	following	words.	As	before,
offerings	should	be	made	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels,	and	the	
Aspirational
Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	should	be
repeated.
2
	Then,	one	should	read	aloud	the	following,	three	or	up	to	seven	times,
calling	to	the	deceased	by	name:
	

O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	carefully	and	understand!	Hell-beings,	gods
and	those	with	the	body	of	the	intermediate	state	are	born	in	a	supernormal
manner.	Formerly,	when	the	visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arose
before	you	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	-	you	did	not	recognise	them.
Then,	overwhelmed	by	terror,	you	would	have	fainted.	Four	and	a	half	days	later,
upon	awakening	from	this	faint,	your	consciousness	has	again	become	clear	and
a	body,	resembling	your	former	one,	has	arisen.	This	[‘body’]	is	described	in	the
tantras:
3
	
Having	the	bodily	form	of	one’s	past	and	emergent	existences,
Complete	with	all	sense-faculties,	and	the	power	of	unobstructed	movement.
Endowed	with	miraculous	abilities	derived	from	past	actions,
Visible	to	those	similar	in	kind	and	through	pure	clairvoyance.
	
Here,	‘past	and	emergent’
4
	
means	that	your	[present]	body	[which	is	a	product
of]	your	past	habitual	tendencies	will	resemble	a	body	of	flesh	and	blood,	but,
like	a	body	of	the	Auspicious	Aeon
	
(
bhadrakalpa
)	
it	will	also	be	radiant	and
possess	 certain	 of	 the	 major	 and	 minor	 marks.	 Since	 this	 [state]	 is	 an
apparitional	experience	of	the	mental	body,	it	is	called	‘the	mental	body	of
apparitional	experience	in	the	intermediate	state’.
5
	
At	this	time,	if	you	are	to	be
born	as	a	god,	you	will	come	to	experience	the	apparitional	field	of	the	realm	of
the	gods.	Depending	on	whichever	of	the	realms	you	are	to	take	birth	in,	whether
that	of	the	antigods,	humans,	animals,	anguished	spirits	or	hell-beings,	you	will
come	to	experience	its	particular	apparitional	field.	Therefore,	‘past’	means	that
for	three	and	a	half	days	you	will	possess	the	bodily	form	[which	is	a	product]	of
your	past	habitual	tendencies	and	existences.	And	‘emergent’	means	that,	after
[three	and	a	half	days],	the	apparitional	field	of	the	next	realm	into	which	you
are	 to	 be	 born,	 will	 ‘emerge’.	 Hence,	 the	 expression	 ‘past	 and	 emergent’
[existences].
Whatever	apparitional	fields	emerge	at	this	time,	do	not	be	drawn	by	them!
Do	not	become	attached	to	them!	Do	not	cling	to	them!	If	you	cling	to	them	and
become	attached,	you	will	continue	
to	roam	amongst	the	six	classes	[of	beings]
and	be	turning	towards	suffering.	Although,	until	yesterday,	the	intermediate
state	of	reality	arose	[within	you],	you	did	not	recognise	it.	As	a	result	you	have
been	compelled	to	wander	here.	Now,	just	as	was	[formerly]	introduced	by	your
spiritual	teacher,	if	you	are	able	to	cultivate,	undistractedly,	[a	recognition	of]

the	essential	nature	[of	reality],	if	you	can	rest	and	abide	without	grasping	and
without	activity,	directly,	in	the	unwavering,	naked	awareness,	which	is	radiance
and	emptiness	conjoined,	you	can	attain	liberation	and	avoid	wandering,	yet
further,	 towards	 the	 womb	 entrances.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 able	 to	 achieve	 this
recognition,	then	visualise	your	meditational	deity,	whichever	it	may	be,	or	your
spiritual	teacher,	as	being	[seated]	on	the	crown	of	your	head	and	be	intensely
and	fervently	devoted.	This	is	most	important.	Again	and	again,	do	not	be
distracted.
	
If	[the	deceased]	does	indeed	recognise	this	essential	nature	[of	reality],	he	or
she	will	attain	liberation	and	avoid	roaming	further	amongst	the	six	classes	[of
beings].	But,	on	account	of	negative	past	actions,	recognition	is	not	easy	to
achieve,	and	therefore,	one	should	reiterate	[the	introduction],	in	the	following
words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	[carefully]	yet	again!	The	phrase,	‘Complete
with	all	sense-faculties,	and	the	power	of	unobstructed	movement’
6
	
means	that,
even	though	you	may	have	been	blind,	deaf	or	lame	while	you	were	alive,	now,	in
the	intermediate	state,	your	eyes	see	forms,	your	ears	hear	sounds	and	all	your
sense-faculties	 are	 faultless,	 clear	 and	 complete.	 Hence	 [the	 tantra]	 says
‘complete	with	all	sense	faculties’.	Recognise	this	[sensory	clarity],	for	it	is	a
sign	that	you	have	died	and	are	wandering	in	the	intermediate	state.	Remember
this	oral	instruction!	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	‘unobstructed’	means	that	the
body	which	you	now	have	is	a	mental	body.	Your	awareness	is	now	separated
from	 its	 physical	 support.	 Therefore,	 this	 is	 not	 a	 body	 of	 solid	 form.
Accordingly,	you	now	have	the	ability	to	move	unobstructedly;	penetrating	to	the
core	of	all	forms,	you	can	pass	through	Mount	Sumeru,	and	through	dwellings,
the	earth,	stones,	boulders	and	mountains.	Indeed,	other	than	your	mother’s
womb	and	the	‘Indestructible	Seat’,
7
	
you	can	pass	back	and	forth	even	through
Mount	Sumeru	itself.	Remember	the	advice	of	your	spiritual	teacher	-	for	
this
[ability]	is	a	sign	that	you	are	wandering	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
[Recognise	this]	and	pray	to	the	meditational	deity	Mahākāruṇika.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	the	phrase	‘endowed	with	miraculous	abilities
derived	from	past	actions’
8
	
does	not	mean	that	you	necessarily	possess	any
enlightened	attributes,	or	any	miraculous	ability	in	meditative	stability,	but	that
you	have	a	miraculous	ability	which	results	from	your	past	actions	and	accords

with	 your	 past	 actions.
9
	
[Consequently],	 you	 will	 have	 the	 ability	 to
circumambulate	Mount	Sumeru	and	the	four	continents,	in	an	instant.	Merely	in
the	time	it	takes	to	withdraw	or	hold	out	an	arm,	you	can	travel	instantly
anywhere	you	wish,	just	by	thinking	of	your	desired	destination.	Do	not	be
fascinated	by	these	diverse	and	haphazard	miraculous	abilities.	Do	not	indulge
in	them.	Of	all	the	things	which	you	have	the	ability	to	recall,	there	is	not	one
which	you	cannot	make	manifest.	You	have	the	ability	now,	to	manifest	[any
aspect	of	your	past],	unimpededly.	Therefore	recognise	this	and	pray	to	your
spiritual	teacher.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	as	for	the	phrase	‘visible	to	those	similar	in	kind
and	through	pure	clairvoyance’,
10
	
the	words	‘similar	in	kind’	mean	that	in	the
intermediate	state,	those	of	a	similar	kind	of	birth	will	come	to	perceive	one
another.	Thus,	in	the	case	of	those	‘similar	in	kind’	who	are	to	be	born	as	gods,
the	gods	[to	be]	perceive	one	another.	Similarly,	those	that	are	‘similar	in	kind’
to	any	of	the	six	classes	[of	beings],	will	come	to	perceive	one	another.	Do	not
become	attached	[at	the	sight	of	these	beings]!	Meditate	on	[the	meditational
deity]	Mahākāruṇika.	The	words	‘visible	through	pure	clairvoyance’	do	not	refer
to	the	[clairvoyance]	which	results	from	the	meritorious	qualities	of	the	gods
and	so	forth,	but	they	do	refer	to	the	pure	clairvoyance	with	which	those	of
genuine	 meditative	 concentration	 perceive.
11
	
However,	 this	 is	 not	 [a
clairvoyance]	that	can	perceive	[the	beings	of	the	intermediate	state]	at	all
times.	If	you	are	intent	on	seeing	[beings	of	like	nature	in	this	intermediate	state]
then	they	will	be	perceived.	If	you	are	not	so	intent,	they	will	not	be	perceived.
This	[clairvoyance]	will	dissolve,	as	soon	as	your	concentration	is	distracted.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	with	a	body	having	qualities	such	as	these	just
described,	you	will	[once	again]	see	your	homeland	and	your	relatives,	as	if	in	a
dream.	Yet,	even	though	you	call	out	to	your	relatives,	they	will	not	reply.	You
will	see	your	family	and	
relatives	crying	and	realise:	‘I	am	dead.	What	should	I
do	now?’	Thinking	this,	you	will	be	overwhelmed	by	intense	suffering	-	you	will
feel	like	a	fish	[expelled	from	the	water],	writhing	on	hot	sand.	Although	you	will
suffer	[on	realising	that	you	are	dead],	this	is	not	helpful	[to	you	now].	If	you
have	a	spiritual	teacher,	pray	to	your	spiritual	teacher!	Pray	to	the	meditational
deity,	Mahākāruṇika!	Although	you	will	feel	attached	to	your	relatives,	this	is	not
helpful	[to	you	now].	Do	not	be	attached!	Pray	to	Mahākāruṇika,	and	be	free	of
suffering,	awe	and	fear.
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 your	 [present]	 awareness,	 freed	 from	 its

[physical]	support,	[is	being	blown]	by	the	coursing	vital	energy	of	past	actions.
Choicelessly,	riding	the	horse	of	breath,	it	drifts	directionless,	like	a	feather	on
the	wind.	To	all	those	who	are	crying,	you	will	call	out:	‘I	am	here!	Do	not	cry!’
But	they	will	not	hear	you.	Yet	again,	you	will	realise	‘I	am	dead’	and	experience
a	very	profound	despair.	Do	not	be	absorbed	by	this	suffering!
Continuously,	there	will	be	greyness,	like	autumn	twilight,	with	neither	day
nor	night.	The	intermediate	states	[between	death	and	birth]	will	last	for	one
week,	or	two,	or	three,	or	four,	or	five,	or	six	or	seven	weeks	-	up	to	forty-nine
days	in	all.	It	is	said	that	suffering	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	will	last,
generally	speaking,	for	twenty-one	days.	However,	since	the	duration	[of	this
state]	is	based	on	past	actions,	a	specific	number	of	days	is	not	certain.
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 at	 this	 time	 the	 fierce,	 turbulent,	 utterly
unbearable	hurricane	of	past	actions	will	be	[swirling]	behind	you,	driving	you
on.	Do	not	be	afraid!	This	is	your	own	bewildered	perception.	Before	you,	there
will	be	a	terrifying,	dense	and	unfathomable	darkness,	echoing	with	cries	of
‘Strike!’	and	‘Kill!’	Do	not	be	afraid!	Moreover,	in	the	case	of	very	negative
beings,	a	swarm	of	carnivorous	ogres	will	arise,	executors	of	the	unfailing	law	of
cause	 and	 effect,
12
	
brandishing	 an	 array	 of	 weapons,	 and	 screaming	 out
aggressively:	‘Strike!’	and	‘Kill!’	You	will	imagine	that	you	are	being	pursued	by
terrifying	wild	animals.	You	will	imagine	that	you	are	being	pursued	by	hordes	of
people,	 and	 [that	 you	 are	 struggling]	 through	 snow,	 through	 rain,	 through
blizzards	and	through	darkness.	There	will	be	the	sound	of	mountains	crumbling,
of	lakes	flooding,	of	fire	spreading	and	the	roar	of	fierce	winds	springing	up.
Terrified,	 you	 will	 try	 to	 flee	 wherever	 you	 can,	 but	 your	 path	 ahead	 will
[suddenly]	be	cut	off	by	three	
precipices:	one	white,	one	red	and	one	black,	all
three	awesomely	frightening;	you	will	feel	as	if	on	the	verge	of	falling.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	these	are	not	truly	precipices.	They	are	aversion,
attachment	and	delusion,	respectively.
13
	
Know	now	that	this	is	the	intermediate
state	of	rebirth,	and	call	to	[the	meditational	deity]	Mahākāruṇika,	by	name,	and
pray:	‘O,	lord	Mahākāruṇika,	Spiritual	Teacher	and	Precious	Jewel,	save	me
(say	your	name)	
from	falling	into	lower	existences’	[Pray	with	deep	commitment
in	this	way];	do	not	forget!
At	 this	 stage,	 in	 the	 case	 of	 those	 individuals	 who	 have	 gathered	 the
accumulations	[of	merit	and	pristine	cognition]	and	have	sincerely	practised	the
teachings,	one	will	be	welcomed	by	[visions	of]	abundant	riches	and	one	will
experience	manifold	blissful	and	happy	states.	[In	the	case	of	those	individuals

who	are	indifferent	or	deluded,	who	have	been	neither	virtuous	nor	negative,	one
will	experience	neither	pleasure	nor	pain,	but	only	an	apathetic	delusion.]
14
Whichever	of	these	happens,	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	whatever	objects	of
desire	or	blissful	or	happy	states	appear	before	you,	do	not	be	attached	to	them.
Do	not	cling	to	them!	Be	free	from	attachment	and	clinging	and	mentally	offer
these	[experiences]	to	your	spiritual	teacher	and	to	the	[Three]	Precious	Jewels.
Particularly,	if	these	visions	are	of	indifference,	devoid	of	happiness	or	pain,
abide	 in	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 Great	 Seal,	 where	 awareness	 is	 [naturally
present],	without	meditation	and	without	distraction.	This	is	very	important.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	at	this	time,	you	will	try	to	find	shelter	[from	the
hurricane	of	past	actions]	below	bridges,	in	mansions,	in	temples	or	grass-huts
or	beside	stūpas	and	so	forth,	but	this	[shelter]	will	be	momentary,	it	will	not
last.	Your	awareness,	now	separated	from	your	body,	will	not	rest	and	you	will
feel	reckless,	angry	and	afraid.	Your	consciousness	will	be	faltering,	superficial,
and	nebulous.	Again	you	will	realise:	‘Alas!	I	am	dead,	what	should	I	do	now?’
Reflecting	on	this,	your	consciousness	will	grow	sad,	your	heart	will	be	chilled
and	you	will	feel	intense	and	boundless	misery.	Your	mind	is	being	compelled	to
move	on,	without	settling	in	one	place.	Do	not	indulge	in	all	kinds	of	memories!
Let	your	awareness	rest	in	an	undistracted	state!
[The	time	will	come	when	you	will	realise	that]	you	have	no	food,	except	that
which	has	been	dedicated	to	you.	As	for	companionship,	[here],	similarly,	there
will	 be	 no	 certainty.	 These	
are	 both	 indications	 that	 the	 mental	 body	 is
wandering	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	Your	present	feelings	of	happiness
and	sorrow	are	[now]	driven	by	your	past	actions.
[Once	again],	seeing	your	homeland,	circle	of	friends,	relatives	and	even	your
own	corpse,	you	will	realise:	‘I	am	dead!	What	should	I	do	now?’	You	will	feel
deeply	saddened	[by	your	existence]	in	a	mental	body,	and	wish,	‘O	that	I	might
obtain	a	physical	body!’	Consequently,	you	will	experience	roaming	here	and
there	in	search	of	a	body.	You	might	even	attempt,	many	times,	to	re-enter	your
own	body,	but	a	long	time	has	already	elapsed	in	the	[previous]	intermediate
state	of	reality.	In	winter	your	body	will	have	frozen,	in	summer	it	will	have
decayed.	Alternatively,	your	relatives	will	have	cremated	it,	buried	it	in	a	grave,
or	offered	it	to	the	birds	and	wild	animals.	Not	finding	a	way	back,	you	will	feel
utterly	distressed,	and	you	will	certainly	feel	yourself	[trying	to]	squeeze	[into
the	crevices]	between	stones	and	rocks.	Torments	such	as	these	will	enfold	you.
This	being	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,	so	long	as	you	search	for	a	body,	you
will	experience	nothing	but	suffering.	Therefore	give	up	your	clinging	to	a	body

and	rest	in	a	state	of	non-activity,	[undistractedly].
	
Liberation	can	be	obtained	in	the	intermediate	state,	as	a	result	of	the	above
introduction.	However,	even	though	this	introduction	is	given,	due	to	negative
past	 actions,	 recognition	 may	 not	 occur.	 So	 again,	 you	 should	 call	 to	 the
deceased	by	name	and	say	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(call	to	the	deceased	by	name)
,	listen	[to	me].	It	is
due	to	your	own	past	actions	that	you	are	now	suffering	in	this	way.	No	one	else
is	responsible	-	this	is	solely	the	result	of	your	own	past	actions.	Pray	ardently
now	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels.	They	will	protect	you.	If	you	do	not	pray
intensely	now,	especially	if	you	do	not	know	how	to	meditate	on	the	Great	Seal,
or	if	you	cannot	meditate	on	a	meditational	deity,	the	‘innate	good	conscience’
within	you
15
	
will	now	gather	together	all	your	virtuous	actions,	counting	them
out	with	white	pebbles,	and	the	‘innate	bad	conscience’	within	you	will	gather
together	all	your	non-virtuous	actions,	counting	them	out	with	black	pebbles.	At
this	moment	you	will	tremble	with	extreme	fear,	awe	and	terror.	You	will	tell	lies,
saying,	‘I	have	not	committed	non-virtuous	
actions!’	But	at	this,	Yama	will	say:
‘I	shall	consult	the	mirror	of	past	actions.’
16
	
In	the	mirror	of	past	actions,	[all
your	 virtues	 and	 non-virtues]	 will	 be	 reflected	 vividly	 and	 precisely.	 Your
attempts	at	deceit	will	be	of	no	use.	Tying	a	rope	around	your	neck,	Yama	will
drag	you	forward.	He	will	sever	[your	head]	at	the	neck,	extract	your	heart,	pull
out	your	entrails,	lick	your	brains,	drink	your	blood,	eat	your	flesh	and	suck
your	bones.	Despite	this,	you	will	not	die.	Even	as	your	body	is	[repeatedly]	cut
into	pieces,	it	will	be	continuously	revived.	Experiencing	being	cut	into	pieces	in
this	way,	time	after	time,	will	cause	enormous	suffering.	From	the	moment	the
counting	of	the	pebbles	begins,	do	not	be	afraid!	Do	not	be	terrified!	Do	not	lie,
and	do	not	be	afraid	of	Yama.	The	body	which	you	now	have	is	a	mental	body;
therefore,	even	though	you	experience	being	slain	and	cut	into	pieces,	you
cannot	die.	[Recognise	now,	that]	in	reality,	you	need	have	no	fear,	because,	[in
truth],	your	[body]	is	a	natural	form	of	emptiness.	The	acolytes	of	Yama	are
also,	[in	reality],	natural	forms	of	emptiness	-	these	are	your	own	bewildered
perceptions.	Your	body,	formed	of	mental	propensities,	is	[a	natural	form	of]
emptiness.	 Emptiness	 cannot	 harm	 emptiness.	 Signlessness	 cannot	 harm
signlessness.	 Outside,	 and	 distinct	 from	 your	 own	 bewildering	 perceptions,
Yama,	 gods,	 malevolent	 forces,	 the	 bull-headed	 Rakṣa	 and	 so	 on,	 do	 not

substantially	 exist.
17
	
Recognise	 this!	 Recognise,	 now,	 that	 this	 is	 the
intermediate	state!	Place	your	mind	in	the	meditative	stability	of	the	Great	Seal!
If	you	do	not	know	how	to	meditate,	directly	examine	the	essence	of	that	which	is
producing	your	fear	and	terror.	This	[essence]	is	a	stark	emptiness,	completely
with	out	inherent	existence	in	any	respect	whatsoever!	This	[stark	emptiness]	is
the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.	Yet,	this	emptiness	is	not	a	vacuous	or	nihilistic
emptiness.	The	essential	nature	of	this	emptiness	is	an	awesome,	direct	and
radiant	awareness,	which	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	[the	Buddha-body	of]
Perfect	Resource.	Indeed,	emptiness	and	radiance	are	not	separate:	the	essential
nature	of	emptiness	is	radiance	and	the	essential	nature	of	radiance	is	emptiness.
This	indivisible,	naked,	unclouded	and	exposed	awareness,	present	as	it	is	right
now	 in	 a	 natural	 uncontrived	 state,	 is	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Essentiality.
18
Furthermore,	the	natural	expressive	power	[of	this	Buddha-body	of	Essentiality]
is	 the	 compassionate	 Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation,	 which	 arises	 everywhere
without	obstruction.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen	[to	me]	now,	and	do	not	be	
distracted.	By
merely	recognising	[the	essential	nature	of	your	experience]	in	the	above	way,
you	will	attain	perfect	buddhahood,	endowed	with	these	four	buddha-bodies.	Do
not	 be	 distracted!	 The	 division	 between	 buddhas	 and	 sentient	 beings	 is
determined	by	this	[recognition].	If	you	are	distracted	at	this	critical	moment,
the	opportunity	to	escape	from	the	swamp	of	suffering	will	be	lost.	It	is	said	of
this	very	moment:
	
In	an	instant,	penetrating	analysis	is	made.
In	an	instant,	perfect	buddhahood	is	attained.
	
Until	yesterday,	because	you	were	distracted,	even	though	so	many	aspects	of	the
intermediate	states	have	arisen,	you	did	not	attain	recognition.	[Up	to	this	time],
you	have	experienced	so	much	fear	and	terror.	Now,	if	you	continue	to	be
distracted,	the	lifeline	of	compassion,	suspended	to	you,	will	be	cut	off	and	you
will	move	on	to	a	place	where	there	is	no	[immediate]	prospect	of	liberation.	So
be	careful.
	
Through	this	introduction,	even	though	[the	deceased]	may	have	failed	to	attain
recognition	 previously,	 he	 or	 she	 will	 be	 able	 to	 do	 so	 at	 this	 stage	 and
consequently	attain	liberation.

If,	however,	[the	deceased]	is	a	lay	person,	who	does	not	know	how	to
meditate,	you	should	say	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	know	how	to	meditate	you	should	call	to
mind	the	Buddha,	the	[sacred]	teachings,	the	[sublime]	assembly	of	monks	and
nuns,	and	[the	meditational	deity]	Mahākāruṇika	and	pray	to	them.	Meditate	on
all	the	fearful	and	terrifying	appearances	as	being	[forms]	of	Mahākāruṇika,	or
your	meditational	deity.	Remember	your	spiritual	teacher	and	remember	the
name	 which	 you	 received	 during	 empowerment	 ceremonies	 in	 the	 human
world.
19
	
[Say	this	name	to]	Yama	Dharmarāja	and	do	not	be	afraid	of	him.
[Know	now,	that]	even	if	you	were	to	plunge	down	over	the	precipices,	you
would	not	be	harmed.	So,	abandon	your	fear	and	your	terror.
	
Even	though	liberation	may	not	have	been	achieved	previously,	if	the	above
introduction	is	accepted,	[the	deceased]	will	attain	liberation	at	this	juncture.
Yet,	 since	 there	 is	 the	 possibility	 that	 [the	 deceased]	 will	 not	 achieve
recognition,	even	though	the	introduction	has	been	given,	it	is	very	important	to
persevere.	Therefore,	once	again,	one	should	call	to	the	deceased	by	name	and
say	the	following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	your	present	perceptions	can,	like	a	catapult,	in	a
instant,	cast	you	into	the	most	awesome	states;	either	blissful	or	full	of	suffering.
Therefore,	now,	[it	is	critical	that]	your	perceptions	are	not	coloured	by	either
attachment	or	aversion.
It	may	be	that	you	are	about	to	take	birth	in	the	higher	realms,	yet	at	the	time
when	the	perceptions	of	the	higher	realms	occur,	your	living	relatives,	now	left
behind,	are	sacrificing	and	offering	many	animals	on	your	behalf,	dedicating
[this	activity]	to	you,	the	deceased.	Corrupted	perceptions	will	thus	arise	and
consequently	an	intense	aversion	may	well	up	[within	you],	and	this	will	form	a
connecting	link	to	a	birth	in	the	hell	realms.	Therefore,	whatever	activities	occur
in	the	place	that	you	have	left	behind,	meditate	on	loving	kindness,	and	ensure
that	aversion	does	not	arise!
Alternatively,	your	mind	may	grow	attached	to	your	wealth	and	possessions,
now	left	behind,	or	else,	knowing	that	your	wealth	and	possessions	are	being
enjoyed	and	owned	by	others,	you	may	become	both	attached	to	those	worldly
goods	 and	 also	 hateful	 towards	 those	 left	 behind	 [who	 are	 using	 your

possessions].	As	a	result	of	this,	a	connecting	link	will	certainly	be	formed	to	a
birth	amongst	the	hell	beings	or	amongst	the	anguished	spirits,	even	though	you
may	have	been	at	the	point	of	attaining	birth	in	[one	of]	the	higher	realms.
However	attached	you	may	be	to	the	wealth	now	left	behind,	you	do	not	have	the
ability	 to	 enjoy	 it.	 Since	 it	 is	 absolutely	 of	 no	 use	 to	 you,	 abandon	 your
attachment	and	yearning	for	the	wealth	that	you	have	left	behind.	Let	it	go!	Be
decisive!	Regardless	of	who	is	enjoying	your	wealth,	do	not	be	possessive!	Let	it
go!	 Cultivate	 devotion,	 and	 imagine	 that	 you	 are	 offering	 these	 [worldly
possessions]	to	your	spiritual	teacher	and	to	the	[Three]	Precious	Jewels.	Rest
in	a	state	free	from	attachment	and	free	from	clinging.
Once	again,	even	when	the
	
Kaṅkaṇ
ῑ
dhāraṇ
ῑ
	
incantation	for	the	dead	is	being
recited	 for	 you	 and	 the
	 Purification	 of	 the	 Lower	 Realms
(Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra)	
is	 being	 recited	 on	 your	 behalf,	 you	 may
perceive,	with	your	present	subtle	cognitive	ability,	that	these	[rites]	are	being
performed	impurely	and	distractedly,	
and	that	those	[who	are	performing	these
rituals]	are	impure	in	both	their	commitments	and	vows	and	are	careless	in	their
conduct.	As	a	result,	you	may	have	no	confidence	in	them,	you	may	form	a	bad
opinion	of	them,	and	you	may	become	fearfully	and	horribly	aware	of	their
negative	past	actions,	etc.,	as	well	as	of	their	impure	practice	of	the	[sacred]
teachings	and	the	rituals.	Feeling	this,	you	will	experience	the	utmost	sadness,
and	think:	‘Alas,	they	have	betrayed	me!	They	have	truly	betrayed	me!’	As	a
consequence	of	your	profound	disenchantment,	instead	of	maintaining	purity	of
perception	and	[feelings	of]	respect,	negative	opinions	and	loss	of	confidence
will	 arise	 within	 you.	 Thus,	 [these	 perceptions	 and	 feelings]	 will	 form	 a
connecting	link	that	will	certainly	propel	you	into	the	lower	existences,	and,	in
this	way,	[your	subtle	cognitive	ability	and	the	rituals	recited	on	your	behalf]
will	not	have	been	of	benefit,	but	rather	of	great	harm.
However	impure	may	be	the	practice	of	the	[sacred]	teachings	by	your	friends
now	left	behind,	you	must	maintain	respect	and	purity	of	perception	from	the
depths	of	your	heart.	Think	to	yourself:	‘My	own	perception	is	so	polluted!	How
could	the	speech	of	the	buddhas	be	impure!	These	[impure	perspectives]	have
arisen	as	a	consequence	of	my	own	impure	perception,	and	[will	appear	to	me]
just	as	the	flaws	on	my	face	will	be	reflected	in	a	mirror.	As	for	these	[individuals
performing	the	rituals,	in	reality]	their	bodies	are	the	[sublime]	community	of
monks	and	nuns,	their	speech	is	the	genuine	[sacred]	teaching,	and	their	minds
are	the	essence	of	the	buddhas.	Therefore,	I	take	refuge	in	them.’	Thinking	thus,
whatever	 activities	 occur	 in	 the	 place	 that	 you	 have	 left	 behind,	 they	 will

certainly	be	beneficial	to	you.	It	is	extremely	important	to	maintain	this	purity	of
perception.	Do	not	forget	this!
Even	if	you	are	about	to	be	born	into	the	lower	existences,	[yet	you	do
maintain	purity	of	perception],	and	you	perceive	the	relatives	that	you	have	left
behind	practising	the	virtuous	teachings,	unstained	by	negativity,	and	you	see
your	spiritual	teachers	and	masters	purely	practising	the	rituals	with	virtuous
body,	speech	and	mind,	you	will	feel	great	joy.	Simply	through	this	[experience
of	great	joy],	even	though	you	were	about	to	fall	into	lower	existences,	this	[joy]
will	form	a	connecting	link,	which	will	certainly	turn	you	back	towards	the
higher	realms.	Since	there	is	such	manifold	benefit,	do	not	now	lapse	into	impure
perception.	It	is	
extremely	important	to	maintain	purity	of	perception	and	to	be
unbiasedly	devoted.	So,	be	careful!
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 in	 short,	 since	 your	 awareness	 during	 this
intermediate	state	lacks	any	[material]	support,	it	is	light	and	volatile,	and
therefore,	whatever	virtuous	or	non-virtuous	perceptions	arise,	these	are	very
powerful.	 Do	 not	 be	 absorbed	 by	 non-virtuous	 thoughts!	 Call	 to	 mind	 the
virtuous	practices	of	your	past!	Even	if	you	did	not	engage	in	virtuous	practices
[during	your	life],	maintain	purity	of	perception	and	deep	devotion!	Pray	to	your
meditational	deity	or	to	Mahākaruṇika,	and	with	a	powerful	longing	repeat	the
following	aspirational	prayer:
20
	
Now	when	I	roam	alone,	separated	from	loved	ones,
And	[myriad]	images	of	emptiness	arise,	naturally	manifesting,
May	the	buddhas	[quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	 may	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 awesome	 and	 terrifying	 intermediate	 state	 be
annulled.
	
When	I	experience	suffering,	as	the	result	of	negative	past	actions,
May	the	meditational	deity	[Mahākāruṇika]	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	all	sounds	be	transformed	into	the	resonance	of	the	Six	Syllables.
	
When	I	am	driven	on	by	past	actions,	unable	to	find	a	refuge,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One,	Mahākāruṇika,	protect	me,
And	as	I	experience	the	suffering	of	habitual	tendencies	and	past	actions,

May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
	
Say	this	aspirational	prayer	with	ardent	longing;	it	will	certainly	lead	you	on	to
the	path.	Be	absolutely	certain	that	this	[aspirational	prayer]	will	not	deceive
you.	This	is	most	important!
Through	these	words,	[the	deceased]	will	regain	his	or	her	focus,	and	recognition
will	occur.	Then,	liberation	will	be	attained.
[OBSTRUCTION	OF	THE	WOMB	ENTRANCES]
Even	though	this	introduction	may	have	been	given	many	times,	due	to	the
potency	of	strong	negative	past	actions,	recognition	may	be	difficult.	It	is	very
beneficial,	 therefore,	 to	 repeat	 [the	 introduction]	 now,	 many	 times.	 Again,
therefore,	calling	to	the	deceased	by	name,	you	should	say	the	following	words
[at	least]	three	times:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	have	not	taken	to	heart	[the	introduction]
which	has	gone	before,	from	now	on,	the	body	of	your	past	life	will	grow	more
faint	and	the	body	of	your	next	life	will	grow	more	vivid.	At	this,	you	will	be
dismayed,	and	you	will	think:	‘I	am	experiencing	such	misery!	Now	I	will	look
for	whatever	kind	of	body	I	can	find.’	Thinking	in	this	way,	you	will	move
haphazardly	and	randomly	towards	whatever	might	appear	and	consequently	the
six	lights	indicative	of	the	six	realms	of	living	beings	will	dawn;	and,	according
to	your	past	actions,	[the	light	of	the	realm]	into	which	you	are	to	be	born	will
shine	the	most	of	all.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	listen!	What	are	these	six
lights,	you	may	ask?	A	dull	white	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the	gods	will
arise.	A	dull	red	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the	antigods	will	arise.	A	dull
blue	light	indicative	of	the	human	realm	will	arise.	A	dull	green	light	indicative
of	the	animal	realm	will	arise.	A	dull	yellow	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the
anguished	spirits	will	arise	and	a	dull	smoky	light	indicative	of	the	realm	of	the
hell-beings	 will	 arise.	 These	 six	 lights	 will	 emerge.	 And	 at	 this	 time,	 your
[present]	body	will	take	on	the	colour	of	the	light	of	the	realm	into	which	you	are
to	be	born.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	at	this	juncture,	the	essential	points	of
the	oral	instructions	are	extremely	important.
Meditate	now	on	the	light	[that	dawns]	as	being	Mahākāruṇika!	Meditate	on
the	thought	that	when	the	light	dawns,	it	is	Mahākāruṇika.	This	is	the	most

profound	crucial	point.	It	is	
extremely	important,	because	[this	oral	instruction]
obstructs	birth.
Alternatively,	you	should	meditate	for	a	long	time	on	your	meditational	deity,
whichever	 it	 may	 be.	 [Meditate	 on	 the	 deity]	 appearing	 like	 an	 illusion,
completely	free	from	inherent	existence.	This	is	called	[the	practice	of]	the	‘pure
illusion-like	body’.	Accordingly,	dissolve	[the	form	of]	the	meditational	deity
from	the	extremities	[inwards],	until	it	disappears	completely,	and	abide	in	the
[resultant]	state	of	emptiness	and	radiance,	where	nothing	at	all	substantially
exists	and	where	there	is	no	subjective	apprehension.	Meditate	yet	again	on	the
meditational	deity.	Meditate	again	on	the	inner	radiance.	Meditate	alternately	in
this	way,	and	after	this,	dissolve	your	awareness	itself	from	the	extremities
[inwards,	 into	 emptiness	 and	 radiance].	 Wherever	 there	 is	 space	 there	 is
awareness.	Wherever	there	is	awareness	there	is	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.
Abide	nakedly,	therefore,	in	the	state	of	the	unimpeded	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
free	from	conceptual	elaboration.	[Abiding]	in	this	state,	birth	will	be	obstructed
and	buddhahood	will	be	attained.
	
Yet,	those	unfamiliar	with	meditative	experience	and	those	very	weak	in	their
practice	will	not	be	able	to	understand	[and	apply	the	above	introductions].	Once
again,	overcome	by	confusion,	they	will	wander	towards	the	womb	entrances.
Thus,	 the	 teachings	 which	 obstruct	 the	 womb	 entrances	 become	 of	 great
importance	and	you	should,	once	again,	call	to	the	deceased	by	name	and	say	the
following	words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	have	not	attained	recognition	[as	a	result	of
the	introductions]	which	have	gone	before,	then,	based	on	the	potency	of	your
past	actions,	the	perception	will	arise	that	you	are	moving	upwards,	or	moving
horizontally	or	moving	downwards.
21
	
As	this	occurs,	you	should	meditate	on
Mahākaruṇika.	Remember	this!
Yet	again,	as	described	before,	the	experience	will	arise	of	being	pursued	by
whirlwinds,	blizzards,	hail,	or	fog;	and	a	crowd	of	people,	and	you	will	be	trying
to	escape.	Those	who	are	lacking	in	merit	will	experience	that	they	are	fleeing
towards	a	place	of	suffering.	Those	with	merit	will	experience	arriving	at	a	place
of	happiness.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	now,	at	this	point,	the	signs	of	
the
environment	into	which	you	are	to	be	born,	on	one	amongst	the	four	continents,
will	arise.	Specifically	for	this	moment,	there	are	many	profound	essential	points

of	 oral	 instruction.	 Therefore	 listen,	 now,	 without	 distraction.	 Even	 though,
previously,	you	have	not	taken	to	heart	the	essential	instructions	introduced	to
you,	 you	 can	 do	 so	 now,	 for	 even	 those	 whose	 practice	 is	 very	 weak	 can
understand	[and	apply	one	of]	the	following	essential	instructions.	So	listen,
now,	without	distraction.
At	this	stage,	it	is	extremely	important	that	you	carefully	employ	the	methods
for	obstructing	the	womb	entrances.	[Principally],	there	are	two	such	methods	of
obstruction.	These	are:	[first],	the	method	which	obstructs	the	person	who	is	to
enter	the	womb	and,	[second],	the	methods	which	obstruct	the	womb	which	is	to
be	entered.
	
The	oral	teaching	for	the	method	which	obstructs	the	person	who	is	to	enter	the
womb,	is	as	follows:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(call	to	the	deceased	by	name)	
visualise	now	your
meditational	deity,	whichever	it	may	be,	with	vibrancy.	[Meditate	on	the	deity]
as	[vividly]	apparent,	yet	completely	lacking	in	inherent	existence,	like	[the
reflection	of]	the	moon	in	water.	If	you	do	not	have	a	specific	meditational	deity,
then	 visualise	 the	 lord	 Mahākāruṇika,	 again	 with	 great	 vibrancy.	 Then,
[gradually],	dissolve	[the	image	of]	the	meditational	deity	from	the	extremities
[inwards,	until	it	disappears	completely]	and	then	meditate	on	the	[resultant
union]	of	inner	radiance	and	emptiness,	which	is	utterly	free	from	any	objective
referent.	This	is	the	profound	essential	point.	Meditate	in	this	way,	for	it	is	said
that	by	this	means	entry	into	a	womb	will	be	averted.
	
Should	even	this	[introduction]	not	cause	obstruction	and	should	[the	deceased]
continue	 to	 draw	 closer	 to	 the	 act	 of	 entering	 a	 womb,	 there	 are	 also	 the
profound	oral	instructions	which	obstruct	the	womb	entrances.	These	are	as
follows:
	
[O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,]	listen	[carefully]!	In	the	recitation	of	the
	Root
Verses	of	the	[Six]	Intermediate	States
,	the	following	lines	are	spoken.	Repeat
these,	now,	after	me:
22
Alas,	now	as	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	arises	before	me,
I	must	with	one-pointed	intention	concentrate	my	mind,
And	resolutely	connect	with	the	residual	potency	of	my	virtuous	past	actions.

I	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	and	call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal.
This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are	imperative.
I	must	give	up	all	jealousy	and	meditate	on	my	spiritual	teacher	with	consort.
	
It	is	extremely	important	to	clearly	repeat	these	verses	aloud,	to	arouse	your
memories	[of	past	virtues],	to	meditate	on	this	[prayer]	and	to	experientially
cultivate	its	meaning.	The	meaning	of	these	verses	is	as	follows:	the	line	‘now	as
the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	arises	before	me’
23
	
explains	that	you	are	now
roaming	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	As	an	indication	of	this,	if	you	look
into	water,	you	will	not	see	your	reflection.	Your	body	does	not	even	cast	a
shadow.	These	are	both	signs	that	you	do	not	have	a	solid	body	of	flesh	and
blood,	but	that	you	are	roaming,	with	a	[subtle]	mental	body,	in	the	intermediate
state	of	rebirth.
Now,	 therefore,	 you	 ‘must	 with	 one-pointed	 intention	 concentrate	 your
mind’,
24
	
undistractedly.	At	this	moment,	this	[singularity	of]	intention	is	by	itself
the	most	important	factor.	It	is	like	a	horse	being	controlled	by	the	use	of	a
bridle.	Whatever	your	intention	focuses	upon,	this	will	come	about.	Do	not	turn
your	mind	to	negative	past	actions!	Call	to	mind,	now,	your	connections	in	the
human	 world	 with	 the	 [sacred]	 teachings	 and	 instructions,	 remember	 the
empowerments	and	oral	transmissions	[previously	received],	remember	[your
connection	with]	this
	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	and	so
forth.	It	is	extremely	important	that	you	‘resolutely	connect	with	the	residual
potency	of	your	virtuous	past	actions’.
25
	
Do	not	forget!	Do	not	be	distracted!
The	present	moment	is	the	dividing-line	between	progression	and	regression.	The
present	moment	is	the	time	when,	by	lapsing	into	laziness,	even	for	an	instant,
you	will	experience	constant	suffering.	The	present	moment	is	the	time	when,	by
concentrating	with	a	singular	intention,	you	will	achieve	constant	happiness.
Concentrate	your	mind	with	a	single-pointed	intention.	
‘Resolutely	connect	with
the	residual	potency	of	your	virtuous	past	actions.’
Now	is	the	time	when	you	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances.	It	is	said	[in	the
verses]	that	you	‘must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	and	call	to	mind	the	methods
of	reversal.	This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are
imperative’.
26
	
You	have	now	arrived	at	that	stage.	Your	priority	now	is	to
obstruct	the	womb	entrances.	There	are	five	methods	which	will	bring	about
obstruction	of	the	womb	entrances,	so	keep	them	carefully	in	mind.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	at	this	stage,	the	perception	will	arise	of	a	male

and	a	female	engaging	in	sexual	intercourse.	Upon	perceiving	this,	do	not	enter
between	the	male	and	the	female,	but	be	mindful	and	‘meditate	on’	the	male	and
the	female	as	being	your	‘spiritual	teacher	with	consort’.
27
	
Prostrate	yourself
before	them	and	make	offerings,	emanating	these	with	your	mind.	Be	intensely
devoted	and	request	instructions	from	[your	spiritual	teacher	and	consort].	Just
by	intently	focusing	your	thought	in	this	way,	the	womb	entrances	will	certainly
be	obstructed.
Should	[the	womb	entrances]	not	be	successfully	obstructed	through	this
method	and	you	are	nonetheless	drawn	ever	nearer	to	entering	the	womb,	then
meditate	 now	 on	 the	 spiritual	 teacher	 and	 consort	 as	 being	 your	 personal
meditational	deities,	whichever	these	may	be,	or	[if	you	do	not	have	a	personal
meditational	deity],	meditate	on	the	spiritual	teacher	and	consort	as	being
Mahākāruṇika	and	his	consort.	Again,	make	offerings,	emanating	these	with
your	mind	and	generate	the	thought	very	intently:	‘I	request	[the	attainment	of
your]	 spiritual	 accomplishment!’	 Thereby,	 the	 womb	 entrances	 will	 be
obstructed.
Should	even	this	not	obstruct	the	womb	entrances,	and	you	are	still	drawn
ever	nearer	to	entering	the	womb,	the	third	method,	which	reverses	attachment
and	aversion,	is	now	to	be	revealed	to	you.	There	are	four	modes	of	birth:	birth
from	an	egg,	birth	from	a	womb,	supernormal	birth,	and	birth	from	warmth	and
moisture.
28
	
Among	these,	the	birth	from	an	egg	and	birth	from	a	womb	are	very
similar,	in	that	in	both	cases	you	will	see	the	male	and	the	female	engaged	in
sexual	union,	as	[described]	above.	If,	based	on	either	attachment	or	aversion,
you	enter	a	womb	at	this	time,	you	will	be	born	as	a	horse,	bird,	dog,	human,	or
whatever	is	appropriate.	If	you	are	to	be	born	as	a	male,	you	will	experience	
the
perceptions	of	a	male.	You	will	feel	intense	aversion	towards	the	father	and	you
will	feel	jealousy	and	attachment	towards	the	mother.	If	you	are	to	be	born	as	a
female,	you	will	experience	the	perceptions	of	a	female.	You	will	feel	intense
envy	and	jealousy	towards	the	mother	and	you	will	feel	intense	attachment	and
affection	towards	the	father.	This	[emotional	arousal]	will	cause	you	to	enter	a
womb.	Here	you	will	experience	the	‘coemergent	delight’,	in	the	midst	of	the
meeting	between	the	sperm	and	the	ovum.	From	that	state	of	bliss	you	will	faint
into	unconsciousness,	and	as	time	passes,	the	embryo	will	come	to	maturity	in
the	womb,	moving	through	[its	various	stages	of	development],	that	is,	the
clotting	of	the	embryo,	the	oval	elongation	of	the	embryo,
29
	
and	so	forth	until
finally,	you	will	emerge	[from	the	womb]	and	open	your	eyes.	Now,	you	will	have

turned	into	a	puppy.	Previously	having	been	a	human	being,	you	will	now	have
become	a	dog.	So	consequently,	you	will	suffer	in	a	dog-kennel,	or	similarly,	in	a
pigsty,	or	an	anthill,	or	a	wormhole,	or	else	you	may	be	born	as	a	baby	bull,	a
goat,	a	sheep	and	so	forth.	There	is	no	way	back.	You	will	experience	all	manner
of	sufferings	in	a	state	of	great	obscurity	and	delusion.	Through	this	process	you
will	continue	to	remain	within	the	six	classes	of	living	beings,	including	the
realms	of	the	hell	beings	and	the	anguished	spirits.	You	will	be	completely
drained	by	boundless	sufferings.	There	is	nothing	more	awesome	or	frightening
than	this!	Oh	dear!	This	is	truly	terrifying!	Oh	dear,	Oh	dear,	in	this	way,	those
who	lack	the	oral	instruction	of	a	genuine	spiritual	teacher	will	indeed	fall	into
the	great	abyss	of	cyclic	existence	and	be	tortured	unbearably	by	continuous
sufferings.	Rather	than	this,	listen	to	my	words!	Understand	this	instruction	of
mine.	I	will	reveal	now	an	oral	instruction	which	obstructs	the	womb	entrances,
through	the	reversal	of	attachment	and	the	reversal	of	aversion.	Listen	and
understand	this	well!	It	is	said	[in	the
	Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate
States
]:
30
	
I	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	and	call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal.
This	is	the	time	when	perseverance	and	purity	of	perception	are	imperative.
I	must	give	up	all	jealousy	and	meditate	on	my	spiritual	teacher	with	consort.
	
As	is	described	[in	the	oral	instruction]	above,	if	you	are	to	be	born	as	a	male,
you	will	feel	attachment	towards	the	mother	and	aversion	towards	the	father.	If
you	are	to	be	born	as	a	female,	you	will	feel	attachment	to	the	father	and
aversion	towards	the	mother.	Thus	you	will	come	to	experience	jealousy,	[a
conflict	of	attachment	and	aversion].	Specific	to	this	stage,	there	is	a	profound
oral	instruction.	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	when	the	feelings	of	attachment	and
aversion	arise,	meditate	as	follows:	‘Alas,	sentient	beings	such	as	I,	with	such
negative	past	actions,	have,	up	until	now,	roamed	in	cyclic	existence.	I	have
continued	to	wander	in	this	way,	being	driven	on	by	my	feelings	of	attachment
and	 aversion.	 If,	 especially	 at	 this	 time,	 I	 continue	 to	 be	 influenced	 by
attachment	and	aversion,	there	is	a	danger	that	I	will	roam	into	the	limitlessly
[diverse]	states	of	cyclic	existence	and	risk	sinking	into	the	ocean	of	suffering,
for	 a	 very	 long	 time.	 Therefore,	 now,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 I	 must	 not
generate	attachment	or	aversion.	Oh	dear,	Oh	dear!	As	of	now,	I	shall	never
again	be	motivated	by	attachment	or	aversion.’	By	concentrating	intently	on	this

thought,	as	it	is	said	in	the	tantras,	the	womb	entrances	will	be	obstructed	by	this
[singular	 intent]	 alone.	 O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 do	 not	 be	 distracted!
Concentrate	your	mind	on	this	thought,	with	a	one-pointed	intention.
	
Yet	if,	even	having	done	this,	the	womb	entrances	are	still	not	obstructed	and
[the	deceased]	draws	ever	nearer	to	entering	a	womb,	then	the	womb	entrances
should	be	obstructed	by	giving	the	oral	instruction	on	the	unreal	and	illusion-like
nature	[of	all	phenomena].
31
	
[O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature],	meditate	in	the	following	way!	‘Alas!	The	father
and	the	mother	[in	sexual	union],	the	rain,	the	blackness,	the	hurricane,	the
thunderous	sound,	the	fearful	and	terrifying	experiences,	the	nature	of	these	and
of	all	phenomena	is	illusion-like.	In	whatever	form	[phenomena]	arise,	they	are
not	real.	All	substantial	things	are	unreal	and	false,	like	a	mirage.	They	are	not
permanent.	They	are	not	changeless.	So	what	is	the	purpose	of	my	attachment
[to	these	perceptions]?	What	is	the	purpose	of	my	awe	and	terror?	That	which	is
non-existent,	 I	 am	 seeing	 as	 existent!	 [In	 reality],	 all	 these	 things	 [that	 I
perceive]	are	the	perceptions	of	my	own	mind.	Yet,	the	essential	nature	of	mind	is
primordially	non-existent,	like	an	illusion.	So	how	is	it	possible	for	things	to	exist
externally,	in	their	own	right?	Since	I	have	not	understood	this	before,	I	have
[always]	regarded	the	non-existent	as	existent.	I	have	regarded	the	unreal	as
real.	I	have	regarded	illusions	as	truth.	This	is	why	I	have	roamed	in	cyclic
existence	for	such	a	long	time.	Now,	yet	again,	if	I	do	not	realise	that	all	these
[phenomena]	 are	 illusions,	 I	 will	 continue	 to	 roam	 in	 cyclic	 existence,
interminably,	and	without	doubt,	I	will	drown	in	a	swamp	of	every	manner	of
suffering.	 Now,	 [I	 must	 realise	 that]	 all	 these	 [phenomena]	 are	 completely
devoid	of	substantial	existence,	even	for	a	single	instant.	[In	reality],	they	are
like	a	dream,	like	an	illusion,	like	an	echo,	like	a	celestial	city,	like	a	mirage,	like
a	reflection,	like	an	optical	illusion,	like	the	moon	[reflected]	in	water.	It	is
absolutely	certain	that	these	[phenomena]	are	not	truly	real,	but	that	they	are
false.	Through	this	singular	resolve,	I	will	blow	apart	my	apprehension	of	their
true	existence.	Through	utter	confidence	in	this	[meditation],	my	apprehension
of	self-existence	will	be	reversed.’	By	knowing	from	the	depths	of	your	heart	that
all	 these	 [phenomena]	 are	 unreal,	 the	 womb	 entrances	 will	 certainly	 be
obstructed.
	

However,	 if,	 despite	 this	 [teaching]	 being	 given,	 the	 apprehension	 of	 true
existence	is	not	shattered,	and	the	womb	entrances	are	therefore	not	obstructed
and	[the	deceased]	draws	ever	nearer	to	entering	a	womb,	then	there	is	a	[final]
profound	oral	instruction:
	
O,	 Child	 of	 Buddha	 Nature,	 if,	 even	 after	 having	 engaged	 in	 the	 above
[meditation],	the	womb	entrances	have	still	not	been	obstructed,	now,	according
to	the	fifth	[profound	oral	instruction],	you	must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	by
meditating	on	inner	radiance.
32
	
The	method	of	meditation	is	as	follows:	‘Alas!
All	[seemingly]	substantial	phenomena	are	[expressions	of]	my	own	mind.	Yet,
[in	reality],	this	mind	is	of	the	nature	of	emptiness,	it	is	beyond	creation	and
beyond	cessation.’	By	focusing	your	thought	in	this	way,	your	mind	should
[naturally]	return	to	an	uncontrived	and	stainless	state.	Let	the	mind	rest	in	this,
its	natural	state,	directly	in	itself,	in	the	same	way,	for	example,	as	water	is
poured	into	water.	Let	[the	mind]	rest	in	its	natural	flow,	clear,	unconstricted,
uncontrived	and	relaxed.
33
	
[By	following	this	method]	
you	can	be	sure	that	the
womb	entrances	to	the	four	modes	of	birth	will	certainly	be	obstructed.	Meditate
again	and	again	in	this	way,	until	the	womb	entrances	are	closed.
	
Set	down	above	are	several	profound	and	genuine	instructions	for	effecting	the
obstruction	of	the	womb	entrances.	For	those	with	high,	average	or	low	ability,	it
is	impossible	not	to	be	liberated	by	these	[instructions].	This	is	because:	first,
consciousness	 in	 the	 intermediate	 state	 is	 endowed	 with	 an,	 albeit	 corrupt,
supernormal	cognitive	ability.	Therefore,	whatever	one	says	[to	the	deceased]	is
heard	by	the	deceased.	Second,	even	if	the	deceased	was	deaf	or	blind	[while	in
the	human	world],	now,	[in	the	intermediate	state],	all	the	sensory	faculties	will
be	complete	and	therefore	whatever	is	said	will	be	apprehended.	Third,	since	the
deceased	is	continuously	being	overwhelmed	by	fear	and	terror,	there	is	an
undistracted	concentration	on	what	to	do;	therefore,	what	is	said	will	be	listened
to.	Fourth,	since	the	consciousness	has	no	[physical]	support,	it	is	easy	to	guide
and	it	can	penetrate	to	the	essence	of	whatever	is	focused	upon.	[Additionally],
since	the	power	of	retention	is	now	many	times	clearer,	even	the	mentally	weak
will	have,	in	the	intermediate	state,	a	lucid	awareness,	by	virtue	of	their	past
actions.	Hence,	they	will	have	the	gift	of	knowing	how	to	meditate	on	that	which
is	taught	and	the	gift	[to	assimilate]	such	points	[of	instruction].	These	are	the
reasons	why	the	performance	of	rituals	on	behalf	of	the	dead	is	beneficial.

Indeed,	it	is	extremely	important	to	persevere	in	the	reading	aloud	of	this	
Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	for	the	entire	forty-nine	days.
For	if	liberation	is	not	achieved	at	one	introduction,	it	can	be	achieved	at	another.
This	is	the	reason	why,	not	just	one,	but	many	introductions	should	be	given.
[CHOOSING	A	WOMB	ENTRANCE]
Then	again,	there	are	several	kinds	[of	persons]	who	do	not	achieve	liberation,
despite	having	received	the	above	introductions	and	having	been	taught	the
above	 visualisation	 techniques.	 This	 [lack	 of	 ability]	 comes	 about	 through
limited	familiarity	with	virtuous	past	actions,	extensive	primal	familiarity	with
non-virtuous	 past	 actions,	 and	 the	 potency	 and	 great	 force	 of	 negative
obscurations.
	
So,	 at	 this	 stage,	 if	 the	 womb	 entrances	 have	 still	 not	 been	 [successfully]
obstructed	[as	described]	above,	there	is	a	profound	oral	instruction	for	choosing
an	[appropriate]	womb	entrance,
34
	which	should	now	be	presented.	Again,	one
should	request	the	assistance	of	the	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas,	take	refuge	in	[the
Three	Precious	Jewels]	and	cultivate	an	altruistic	intention.	Then,	as	before,
calling	to	the	deceased	by	name,	three	times,	one	should	say	the	following
words:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,
	(repeat	the	name	of	the	deceased),	
listen	[carefully].
Even	though	many	[authentic]	introductions	to	the	instructions	have	previously
been	given	to	you,	up	until	this	stage,	you	have	not	taken	these	to	heart.	Now,	if
you	have	been	unable	to	obstruct	the	womb	entrances,	the	time	has	actually
come	for	you	to	assume	a	body.	There	are	[not	just	one,	but]	several	different
kinds	of	profound	[and	genuine]	instructions	which	relate	to	your	choice	of	an
appropriate	womb	entrance.	So	comprehend	these	well.	Do	not	be	distracted.
[Listen]	without	distraction!	Understand,	and	maintain	a	firm	intention!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	now,	[if	you	are	to	be	born	as	a	human]	the
indications	and	signs	which	relate	to	the	environment	into	which	you	may	be
born,	on	one	amongst	the	[four]	continents,	will	arise.	You	must	recognise	these
[indications]!	 Indeed,	 you	 must	 choose	 the	 continent	 based	 on	 [a	 careful
examination	of	these]	indications	of	the	environment	into	which	you	may	be
born.

If	you	are	to	take	birth	on	the	Eastern	Continent,	Videha,	you	will	see	a	lake,
adorned	by	male	and	female	swans.	Do	not	be	drawn	towards	this	[place]!	Call
to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal	[and	apply	these]!	For	were	you	to	go	there,
even	though	it	is	a	happy	and	tranquil	place,	it	is	an	environment	where	the
[sacred]	teachings	do	not	flourish.	So	do	not	enter	[this	continent]!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	on	the	Southern	Continent,	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,	you	will	see
grand	and	delightful	mansions.	If	indeed	you	can	enter	here,	do	so!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	on	the	Western	Continent,	Aparagodan
ῑ
ya,	you	will	see
a	lake	adorned	[around	its	shores]	by	male	and	female	horses.	Do	not	be	drawn
towards	this	place!	Call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal	[and	apply	these]!	For
even	though	it	is	a	place	of	great	wealth	and	[abundant]	resources,	it	is	an
environment	where	the	[sacred]	teachings	do	not	flourish.	So	do	not	enter	[this
continent]!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	on	the	Northern	Continent,	Uttarakuru,	you	will	see	a
lake	adorned	[around	its	shores]	by	cattle	or	a	lake	adorned	by	trees.	Recognise
these	appearances	as	indications	of	the	birth	that	you	are	about	to	assume!	Do
not	enter	there!	For	even	though	this	is	a	place	where	there	is	longevity	and
which	has	merit,	it	is	an	environment	where	the	[sacred]	teachings	do	not
flourish.	So	do	not	enter	[this	continent]!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	as	a	god	you	will	see	delightful	celestial	palaces,
many-storeyed	and	composed	of	diverse	jewels.	If	indeed	you	can,	you	should
enter	here!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	as	an	antigod,	you	will	see	exquisite	groves	and
spinning	wooden	torches	[creating]	wheels	of	fire.	Do	not	enter	there,	under	any
circumstances!	Call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal	[and	apply	these]!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	as	an	animal,	you	will	see	rocky	caverns,	empty
hollows	and	straw	sheds,	shrouded	by	mist.	Do	not	enter	there!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	as	an	anguished	spirit,	you	will	see	tree-stumps,	black
protruding	silhouettes,	blind	desolate	gorges,	or	total	darkness.	Were	you	to	go
there,	you	would	be	born	as	an	anguished	spirit	and	experience	the	manifold
sufferings	of	[insatiable]	hunger	and	thirst.	Do	not	enter	there!	Call	to	mind	the
methods	of	reversal	[and	apply	these]!	Be	courageous	and	strong!
If	you	are	to	take	birth	as	a	hell	being,	you	will	hear	the	songs	of	those	of
negative	past	actions.	Or,	quite	simply,	you	will	feel	powerless	and	compelled	to
enter.	Whereupon,	the	perception	will	arise	that	you	are	moving	into	a	land	of
darkness,	where	there	are	black	and	reddened	houses,	black	earth-pits	and	black
roads.	Were	you	to	be	drawn	to	this	place,	you	would	enter	the	hells,	and

experience	the	[searing]	unbearable	sufferings	of	heat	and	cold.	Be	careful!	Do
not	enter	into	the	midst	of	this,	for	there	will	be	no	opportunity	to	turn	back.	Do
not	enter	there,	under	any	circumstances!	As	it	is	said	[in	the	root	verses]:	‘You
must	obstruct	the	womb	entrances	and	call	to	mind	the	methods	of	reversal.’
These	are	[wholly]	necessary	now!
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	although	you	do	not	wish	to	move	forward,	you
are	powerless	not	to	do	so.	The	avenging	forces,	who	are	the	executors	of	the
unfailing	laws	of	cause	and	effect,	will	be	
pursuing	you.	You	will	have	no	choice
but	to	move	forward.	Before	you,	the	avengers	and	executors	will	be	leading	the
way.	The	experience	will	arise	of	trying	to	flee	from	these	forces,	of	trying	to	flee
from	the	darkness,	from	the	most	violent	windstorms,	from	the	[thunderous]
tumult,	the	snow,	the	rain,	the	hail	and	the	turbulent	blizzards,	which	swirl
around	you.	[Frightened],	you	will	set	off	to	seek	a	refuge	and	you	will	find
protection	inside	an	enclosed	space,	such	as	within	the	mansions,	just	described,
or	in	rock-shelters,	or	holes	in	the	ground,	or	amongst	trees,	or	within	the	bud	of
a	lotus	flower.	Hiding	here,	you	will	be	very	hesitant	to	come	out,	and	you	will
think:	‘I	should	not	leave	here	now.’	You	will	be	very	reluctant	to	be	separated
from	this	protected	place	and	you	will	become	utterly	attached	to	it.	Then,
because	you	are	so	very	hesitant	to	go	outside,	where	you	would	be	confronted
by	the	fears	and	terrors	of	the	intermediate	state,	you	will,	because	of	this	fear
and	awe,	continue	to	hide	away.	Thus,	you	will	assume	a	body,	however	utterly
bad	that	may	be,	and	you	will,	[in	time],	come	to	experience	all	manner	of
sufferings.	This	[experience	of	wanting	to	hide]	is	a	sign	that	you	are	being
obstructed	by	malignant	forces	and	carnivorous	ogres.	Particularly	related	to
this	stage,	there	is	a	profound	oral	instruction.	Listen,	therefore,	and	understand!
At	this	time,	when	you	are	being	pursued	by	avenging	forces	and	you	feel
powerless	[to	escape]	and	you	are	terrified	and	frightened,	you	must,	in	an
instant	 and	 with	 perfect	 recall,	 visualise	 the	 Transcendent	 Lord	 Mahottara
Heruka,	or	Hayagr
ῑ
va,	or	Vajrapāṇi,	or	else,	if	you	have	one,	your	personal
meditational	deity.	[Visualise	the	deity]	as	having	a	huge	buddha-body,	with
thick	 limbs,	 standing	 upright,	 in	 a	 terrifying	 wrathful	 manifestation,	 which
pulverises	every	form	of	obstructing	force.	[By	virtue	of	this	practice],	insulated
from	the	avengers	by	the	blessing	and	compassion	[of	the	meditational	deity],
you	will	secure	the	ability	to	choose	a	womb	entrance.	This	is	a	profound	and
genuine	crucial	point	of	the	oral	instructions.	So,	understand	this	now!
Moreover,	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	the	gods	[inhabiting	the	form	realms]
of	meditative	concentration,	and	similar	beings	[of	the	higher	realms],	take	birth

through	 the	 potency	 of	 their	 meditative	 stability.
35
	
Also,	 certain	 classes	 of
malevolent	forces,	including	the	anguished	spirits,	arise	on	the	basis	of	the
transformation	of	their	mental	body	itself	during	this	very	[intermediate	state],
through	a	shift	in	their	mode	of	perception.	[In	this	way],	they	assume	the	forms
of	an	anguished	spirit,	malign	force	or	carnivorous	ogre,	capable	of	displaying
diverse	miraculous	acts.	The	anguished	spirits	who	reside	in	the	ocean	depths,
the	anguished	spirits	who	move	through	space,	the	eighty	thousand	classes	of
obstructing	forces,	and	so	forth,	all	come	into	existence	consequent	on	such	a
shift	in	their	mode	of	perception,	while	[still]	in	the	mental	body.
At	this	time,	therefore,	[while	visualising	the	wrathful	deity]	it	is	essential	that
you	hold	in	mind	the	meaning	of	emptiness,	[the	essence	of]	the	Great	Seal.	If
you	are	not	able	to	practise	in	this	way,	you	must	cultivate	your	experience	of	the
illusion-like	natural	expressive	power	[of	actual	reality].	If	you	are	unable	even
to	 practise	 in	 that	 way,	 you	 should	 meditate	 on	 the	 meditational	 deity
Mahākāruṇika,	without	allowing	your	mind	to	experience	attachment,	in	any
respect	whatsoever.	Through	[practising	this	effectively],	buddhahood	will	be
attained	in	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	during	this	intermediate	state.
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if,	due	to	the	potency	of	your	past	actions,	you
must	at	this	stage	enter	a	womb,	a	further	teaching	on	the	methods	of	choosing	a
womb	entrance	is	now	to	be	taught.	Listen,	[carefully],	therefore!	Do	not	just
move	towards	whatever	womb	entrance	appears	to	you.	If,	whilst	being	pursued
by	the	avenging	forces	[of	the	laws	of	cause	and	effect],	you	are	powerless	[and
unable	to	resist]	the	process	of	entering	[a	womb],	then	you	must,	at	this	time,
meditate	on	Hayagr
ῑ
va.	Since	you	now	possess	a	subtle	supernormal	cognitive
ability,	you	will	[clearly]	apprehend	all	the	[potential]	birthplaces	as	they	arise,
in	sequence.	Therefore,	make	your	choice,	[based	on	the	examination	of	the
indications	 and	 based	 on	 the	 instructions]!	 There	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 oral
instruction	 [which	 can	 now	 be	 applied]:	 [first],	 the	 oral	 instructions	 for
transferring	the	consciousness	to	the	pure	buddha	fields
36
	
and	[second],	the
instructions	 for	 choosing	 a	 womb	 entrance	 within	 impure	 cyclic	 existence.
Therefore,	[listen	carefully	and]	do	as	follows:
First,	the	transference	of	consciousness	to	the	utterly	pure	realms	of	the	sky-
farers	is	effected	by	those	of	highest	ability,	by	directing	their	intention	as
follows.	‘Alas!	I	am	deeply	sad	that	even	after	an	infinite	“incalculable	aeon”,	I
am	still	left	behind	in	this	swamp	of	cyclic	existence.	How	dreadful	it	is,	that
while	so	many	have	attained	buddhahood	in	the	past,	I	have	still	not	achieved

liberation.	Now,	this	cycle	of	existence	disgusts	me!	It	horrifies	me!	I	have	long
been	led	astray	by	it!	Now,	the	moment	approaches	for	me	to	move	forward!
Now,	I	must	take	birth,	miraculously,	in	the	bud	of	a	lotus	flower,	in	the	presence
of	the	Buddha	Amitābha,	in	the	western	Buddha	field	of	the	Blissful
	(
Sukhāvat
ῑ
)
!’
Focus	your	intention,	concentratedly,	on	this	thought!	[It	is	essential	that	you
make	this	effort!]	Alternatively,	you	can	focus	your	intention	on	whichever
buddha	 field	 you	 wish.	 On	 Manifest	 Joy
	 (
Abhirati
)
,	 on	 Dense	 Array
(
Ghanavyūha
)
,	on	Alakāvat
ῑ
,	on	Mount	Potālaka,	or	[you	may	wish	to	focus]	on
coming	into	the	presence	of	[Padmasambhava	of]	Oḍḍiyāna,	in	the	celestial
palace	of	Lotus	Light,	or	indeed	on	whichever	buddha	field	you	wish	to	enter.	Be
single-minded!	 Do	 not	 be	 distracted!	 Immediately	 upon	 establishing	 [this
intention],	 you	 will	 take	 birth	 in	 the	 [chosen]	 buddha	 field.	 Yet	 again,
alternatively,	if	you	wish	to	proceed	into	the	presence	of	Maitreya	in	[the	realm
of]	The	Joyful
	(
Tuṣita
)
,	think	as	follows:	‘At	this	juncture	in	the	intermediate
state,	the	moment	has	come	for	me	to	proceed	into	the	presence	of	the	king	of	the
[sacred]	teachings,	Maitreya,	in	[the	realm	of]	The	Joyful.	Therefore,	it	is	there
that	I	will	go!’	If	you	focus	your	intention	on	this	thought,	you	will	take	birth,
miraculously,	in	the	heart	of	a	lotus,	in	the	presence	of	Maitreya.
Alternatively,	if	you	are	unable	to	accomplish	this	[transference],	or	if	you
desire	to	enter	a	womb	or	you	are	obliged	to	enter	one,	then	there	are	the
following	 instructions	 on	 choosing	 a	 womb	 entrance	 within	 impure	 cyclic
existence.	 Therefore,	 listen	 [carefully].	 Utilising	 the	 supernormal	 cognitive
ability	 which	 you	 now	 possess,	 examine	 the	 continents	 once	 again,	 as	 just
described,	and	make	your	choice.	You	must	enter	a	land	where	the	[sacred]
teachings	flourish!
[Be	warned,	however!]	It	could	be	that,	[in	reality],	you	are	about	to	take
birth,	by	entering	into	a	substance	which	is	fetid	and	polluted,	and	yet	that	filthy
mass	will	be	perceived	by	you	as	sweet-smelling	and	you	will	be	drawn	towards
it	and	take	birth	within	it.	Therefore,	whatever	such	[attractive]	appearances
may	arise,	do	not	grasp	at	them	as	substantially	real!	Ensure	that	you	remain
utterly	free	from	the	symptoms	of	attachment	and	aversion,	and	on	that	basis
choose	an	excellent	womb	entrance.
It	is	extremely	important	that	your	motivation	is	firmly	concentrated	[as	you
approach	the	womb	entrance].	Therefore	think	as	
follows:	‘Ah!	For	the	sake	of
all	sentient	beings,	I	shall	be	born	as	a	universal	monarch,	or	[acting	purely]
like	a	great	[dignified]	sal	tree,	I	shall	be	born	into	the	brāhman	class,	or	as	the
child	 of	 an	 accomplished	 master,	 or	 into	 a	 family	 which	 maintains	 an

immaculate	lineage	of	the	[sacred]	teachings,	or	into	a	family	where	the	mother
and	father	are	deeply	devout.	Then,	once	I	have	taken	on	a	body	which	is	blessed
with	the	merit	of	being	able	to	act	on	behalf	of	all	sentient	beings,	I	shall
[dedicate	 myself	 to]	 acting	 on	 their	 behalf!’	 You	 must	 concentrate	 your
motivation	on	this	thought	and	[thus]	enter	the	womb.
As	you	enter	the	womb,	consecrate	it	[by	perceiving	it]	as	a	celestial	palace	of
the	deities.
37
	
Be	full	of	devotion.	Ensure	that	you	enter	whilst	praying	to	and
imagining	that	you	are	receiving	empowerments	from	the	conquerors	of	the	ten
directions	and	from	their	sons,	as	well	as	from	the	meditational	deities	and,	in
particular,	from	Mahākāruṇika.
[However	be	warned],	for	as	you	make	this	choice	of	a	womb	entrance,	there
is	a	risk	of	error.	There	is	the	risk	of	error	when,	through	the	potency	of	past
actions,	an	excellent	womb	entrance	is	perceived	as	a	bad	one,	and	when	a	bad
womb	entrance	is	perceived	as	a	good	one.	At	this	time,	the	essential	points	of
the	teaching	are	crucial.	Therefore,	once	again,	you	should	act	as	follows.	Even
though	perceptions	of	an	excellent	[womb	entrance]	may	occur,	do	not	become
attached	to	these.	And	[conversely]	even	though	perceptions	of	a	poor	[womb
entrance]	may	occur,	do	not	feel	aversion.	The	essential	point	of	the	profound
and	 genuine	 [instructions]	 is	 that	 you	 enter	 the	 womb	 in	 a	 state	 of	 great
equanimity,	utterly	free	from	[the	dichotomies	of]	good	and	bad,	acceptance	and
rejection,	or	attachment	and	aversion.
	
Nevertheless,	with	the	exception	of	certain	persons	who	have	experience	of	this
[equanimity]	it	is	difficult	[for	beings]	to	sever	themselves	from	the	deep-seated
and	 long-lasting	 disease	 of	 negative	 habitual	 tendencies.	 Therefore,	 if	 [the
deceased]	remains	unable	to	be	free	from	attachment	and	aversion,	in	the	above
manner,	such	negative	beings	who	are	of	the	lowest	capacity	may	seek	refuge	in
the	animal	realms	or	similar	[kinds	of	inferior	existences].	In	order	to	counteract
this,	again	calling	to	the	deceased	by	name,	you	should	speak	as	follows:
	
O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	if	you	do	not	know	how	to	choose	a	womb	entrance
and	 you	 are	 unable	 to	 give	 up	 your	 attachment	 and	 your	 aversion,	 then,
regardless	of	which	of	the	above	appearances	arise,	you	must	call	out,	by	name,
to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels.	Take	refuge	in	them!	Pray	to	Mahākāruṇika!	Go
forward	with	your	head	held	high.	Recognise	that	this	is	the	intermediate	state!
Give	up	your	attachment	and	your	clinging	to	the	friends,	sons,	daughters	and

relatives	that	you	have	left	behind.	These	[attachments]	are	not	helpful	[to	you
now].	Enter	into	the	blue	light	of	the	human	realm.	Enter	into	the	white	light	of
the	realm	of	the	gods.	Enter	into	the	mansions	of	precious	jewels	and	the
gardens	of	delight.
	
This	[introduction]	should	be	enunciated	up	to	seven	times.	Then	one	should
pray	to	the	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas,	[reciting	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	Calling
to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
].
38
	Then	one	should	read	aloud,
up	to	seven	times,	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the
Intermediate	States
,	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	[Six]	Intermediate	States
,	and	the
Aspirational	 Prayer	 which	 Rescues	 from	 the	 Dangerous	 Pathways	 of	 the
Intermediate	States
.
39
	Then,	one	should	also	read	aloud,	clearly	and	with	correct
pronunciation,	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-
physical	Aggregates
.	And	you	should	also	read	aloud	the	
Spiritual	Practice:
Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
.
40
CONCLUSION
Thus,	 [in	 summary],	 by	 acting	 correctly,	 yogins	 with	 high	 realisation	 will
[successfully]	effect	the	transference	of	consciousness	at	the	moment	of	death,
and,	being	spared	the	necessity	of	having	to	wander	through	the	intermediate
states,	will	attain	liberation	in	an	ascending	and	core-penetrating	manner.	Certain
others,	below	these	[yogins	in	ability],	who	have	achieved	[direct]	meditative
experience,	will	recognise	the	inner	radiance	of	reality,	at	the	culmination	of	the
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death,	[and	will,	similarly,	attain	buddhahood]	in
an	ascending	and	core-penetrating	manner.	Others,	below	these,	in	accord	with
their	inheritance	of	past	actions	and	their	particular	level	of	ability,	
will	attain
liberation	at	one	[moment]	or	at	another,	during	the	[respective]	weeks	[which
follow	the	moment	of	death],	as	the	visions	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
gradually	arise	in	the	intermediate	state	of	reality.	Since	there	is	a	succession	of
dangerous	 passageways,	 recognition	 will	 occur	 at	 an	 appropriate	 juncture
[during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality]	and	liberation	will	follow.
However,	those	who	have	a	very	weak	inheritance	of	[positive]	past	actions,
those	 who	 are	 greatly	 clouded	 by	 negative	 obscuration	 and	 those	 who	 are
burdened	 by	 the	 most	 non-virtuous	 past	 actions,	 will	 be	 obliged	 to	 roam

downwards	into	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	Here,	as	before,	since	there	are
different	levels	of	introduction,	like	the	rungs	of	a	ladder,	recognition	will	occur,
if	not	at	one	stage,	then	at	another;	and	thereby	liberation	will	follow.
But	if	those,	just	mentioned,	who	have	a	weak	inheritance	of	[positive]	past
actions,	do	not	achieve	recognition	and	are	accordingly	overcome	by	fear	and
terror,	 then,	 there	 is	 a	 graded	 series	 of	 different	 forms	 of	 instruction	 [for
obstructing,	and]	for	choosing,	the	womb	entrance.	Thus,	if	recognition	does	not
occur	 in	 the	 course	 of	 one	 such	 teaching,	 then,	 these	 individuals	 will	 be
introduced	to	yet	another	[instruction]	and	upon	understanding	the	[appropriate]
visualisation	technique	they	will	achieve	the	inestimable	bounty	of	the	higher
existences.	Even	if	one	is,	like	a	beast,	the	lowest	of	the	low,	through	the
munificence	of	taking	refuge,	one	will	avoid	birth	in	inferior	existences	and
assume	a	precious	human	body,	[blessed]	with	the	benefits	of	freedom	and
favourable	opportunities.	Then,	in	the	life	to	come,	one	will	meet	a	spiritual
teacher	 or	 spiritual	 friend,	 and	 one	 will	 receive	 the	 teachings,	 and	 thereby
liberation	will	follow.
This	[sacred]	teaching,	when	encountered	in	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,
is	 an	 [oral]	 instruction	 that	 connects	 [the	 deceased]	 with	 their	 residual
inheritance	of	virtuous	past	actions.	This	is	why	it	[is	said	to]	resemble	a
connecting	tube	which	[re-establishes	continuity]	when	inserted	into	a	broken
water	channel.	Therefore,	[based	on	the	veracity	of	this	method],	it	is	impossible
not	to	be	liberated	upon	hearing	this	teaching,	even	for	those	of	the	greatest
negativity.	 This	 is	 because,	 during	 the	 intermediate	 states,	 both	 the
compassionate	invitation	of	all	the	[Peaceful	and	Wrathful]	Conquerors	and	the
invitation	of	the	manifestations	of	the	malevolent	and	obstacle-causing	forces
arise	simultaneously.	As	this	occurs,	merely	by	hearing	this	[sacred]	teaching,
the	mode	of	
perception	[of	the	deceased]	is	transformed	and	liberation	is	thereby
attained.
Further,	this	transformation	is	easy	to	effect	because	[the	deceased]	now
possesses	a	[subtle]	mental	body	and	not	a	body	of	flesh	and	blood;	the	deceased
continues	to	see	and	hear,	with	a	subtle	supernormal	cognitive	ability	based	on
the	 potency	 of	 past	 actions,	 however	 far	 he	 or	 she	 has	 wandered	 into	 the
intermediate	states.	[Thus],	by	sustaining	mindfulness	[of	the	teaching],	the
deceased	is	capable	of	transforming	his	or	her	perception	in	an	instant.	This	is
why	[the	reminder	of	the	teaching]	is	extremely	beneficial.	Its	impact	is	like	that
of	a	catapult	machine;	in	other	words,	it	resembles	the	way	in	which	a	huge	tree-
trunk,	 incapable	 of	 being	 lifted	 by	 a	 hundred	 men,	 can	 be	 easily	 steered

wherever	one	wants	in	a	moment,	when	it	is	floated	in	water.	[In	essence,	the
impact	of	hearing	this	doctrine]	resembles	the	turning	of	a	horse	by	its	bridle.
All	those	who	have	died	should	be	approached	in	the	manner	[here	described].
If	the	corpse	is	present,	then	a	friend	should	sit	close	to	it	and	repeatedly	read
aloud	this	succinct	reminder.	This	reading	should	continue	[at	least]	until	blood
and	serum	emerge	from	the	nostrils	[of	the	deceased];	and	until	then,	the	corpse
must	not	be	disturbed.
The	 commitments	 which	 relate	 to	 this	 practice	 are	 as	 follows:	 no	 living
creatures	should	be	killed	in	dedication	to	the	dead	person;	relatives	and	friends,
whether	oneself	or	others,	should	not	cry,	shout,	mourn	or	wail	in	the	presence	of
the	corpse;	and	instead	should	engage	in	as	much	virtuous	activity	as	possible.
Further,	it	would	be	extremely	beneficial	if	this	[sacred]	teaching	of	the	
Great
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
	is	recited	as	a	complement	to
[other	 systems	 of]	 meditative	 guidance,	 irrespective	 of	 the	 category	 of	 the
[sacred]	teachings	to	which	they	belong.
Further,	this	text	should	be	recited	constantly.	Its	words	and	meaning	should
be	 learnt	 by	 heart.	 Then,	 if	 one’s	 health	 permits,	 when	 [the	 onset	 of]	 the
intermediate	 state	 of	 the	 time	 of	 death	 becomes	 certain,	 and	 the	 signs	 of
[approaching]	death	are	recognised,	one	should	read	this	text	aloud	to	oneself,
and	reflect	on	its	words	and	meaning.	If	one’s	health	does	not	allow	this,	then
entrust	the	book	to	a	fellow	Buddhist	for	him	or	her	to	read	aloud.	The	
reminder
thus	being	made,	there	is	no	doubt	that	liberation	will	assuredly	be	attained.
This	teaching,	which	does	not	necessarily	require	[prior]	meditation	practice,
is	the	profound	instruction	which	liberates	by	being	seen,	liberates	by	being
heard	and	liberates	by	being	read	aloud.	This	profound	instruction	is	one	which
can	lead	even	those	of	the	greatest	negativity	on	the	direct	path	[to	liberation].
Ensure	that	its	words	and	meaning	are	retained	in	the	memory	[such	that]	they
are	not	forgotten,	even	if	you	were	to	be	chased	by	seven	[ferocious]	dogs.	This
is	a	pith	instruction	for	the	attainment	of	buddhahood	at	the	time	of	death.	[Even
if]	all	the	buddhas	of	the	past,	present	and	future	[were	to	search],	they	would
not	find	a	[sacred]	teaching	superior	to	this.
This	 completes	 the	 instruction	 on	 the	 intermediate	 state,	 which	 liberates
corporeal	beings,	the	profound,	refined	essence,	entitled	the	
Great	Liberation	by
Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
.	It	was	brought	forth	from	the	mountain	of
Gampodar	by	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa,	as	a	precious	treasure.
MAṄGALAM!

12
Aspirational	Prayers
CONTEXT
If	possible,	the	dying	person	should	recite	these	three	aspirational	prayers
with	intense	longing	at	the	time	of	death.
Otherwise,	the	attending	lama	should	recite	these	prayers,	also	with
intense	longing,	immediately	before	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
	
(Chapter
11)	is	read	to	the	dying	person.	That	is,	following	the	taking	of	refuge	in
the	Three	Precious	Jewels	-	the	Buddha,	the	sacred	teachings	and	the
monastic	community	-	and	the	making	of	offerings.
At	this	time,	when	it	is	likely	that	the	dying	person’s	consciousness	is
dimmed	and	the	dying	person	may	be	feeling	afraid,	it	is	regarded	as
crucially	important	for	the	dying	person	to	place	their	confidence	in	the
buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	and	to	request	the	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	to
be	their	refuge	and	guide.
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas
and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
.
1
	
I	bow	down	to	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Conquerors!
	
This	prayer	should	be	recited	at	the	time	of	one’s	own	death,	[or
whenever	appropriate].	First,	make	offerings,	both	actual	and	visualised,
to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels.	Then,	while	holding	fragrant	incense	in
one’s	hand,	say	the	following	words	with	fervent	intensity:
	
O,	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas,	abiding	in	the	ten	directions,	refuge	of
living	beings,	imbued	with	compassion,	imbued	with	knowledge,	imbued
with	clear	vision	and	imbued	with	love,	come	to	this	place,	by	the	power
of	your	compassion	and	accept	these	displayed	and	visualised	offerings!
O,	Compassionate	Ones,	as	you	are	the	fountain	of	all-knowing	pristine

cognition,	of	loving	compassion,	of	effective	activity,	and	of	a	power	to
grant	refuge,	beyond	conception,	[come	to	this	place!]
O,	Compassionate	Ones,	this	human	being,
	(say	the	name)
,	is	leaving
this	world	and	journeying	to	another	shore.	He
2
	
is	being	cast	off	from
this	 world	 and	 approaching	 the	 great	 transition	 of	 death.	 Suffering
deeply,	he	is	without	a	friend,	without	a	refuge,	without	a	protector	and
without	a	companion.	His	perception	of	this	life	is	fading	away.	He	is
moving	on	to	another	world,	entering	a	dense	darkness	and	falling	into
an	unfathomable	abyss.	Entering	the	thick	forest	of	doubt,	he	will	be
driven	on	by	the	potency	of	past	actions.	He	will	be	entering	a	great
wilderness,	borne	away	on	a	great	ocean,	and	driven	on	by	the	vital
winds	of	past	actions.	He	will	be	moving	in	a	direction	where	there	is	no
firm	 ground,	
entering	 a	 great	 battlefield,	 being	 seized	 by	 great
malevolent	forces	and	becoming	overwhelmed	by	fear	and	terror	upon
meeting	the	executors	of	the	unfailing	laws	of	cause	and	effect.	In	accord
with	his	past	actions,	powerless	[to	resist],	he	may	even,	yet	again,	be
entering	the	realms	of	rebirth.	The	time	has	come	when	he	has	no	choice
but	to	move	on,	alone,	leaving	his	dear	friends	behind.
O,	Compassionate	Ones,	grant	refuge	now	to	this	person
	(say	the
name)
,	who	has	no	refuge!	Protect	him!	Be	his	companion!	Defend	him
from	the	great	darkness	of	the	intermediate	state!	Turn	back	the	great
hurricane	of	past	actions!	Protect	him	from	the	great	fear	and	terror	of
the	unfailing	laws	of	cause	and	effect!	Rescue	him	from	the	long	and
dangerous	pathways	of	the	intermediate	state!	O,	Compassionate	Ones,
be	unsparing	in	your	compassion!	Grant	assistance	to	him!	Do	not	allow
him	to	be	expelled	into	the	three	kinds	of	inferior	existence.	Without
wavering	from	your	ancient	vows,	swiftly	release	the	power	of	your
compassion.	O,	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas,	for	the	sake	of	this	person
(say	the	name)
,	be	unsparing	in	your	compassion,	skilful	means	and
ability!	Seize	him	with	your	compassion!	Do	not	allow	[this]	sentient
being	to	fall	under	the	power	of	negative	past	actions!	O,	Three	Precious
Jewels,	protect	us	from	the	sufferings	of	the	intermediate	state!
	
This	
Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for
Assistance
	should	be	read	aloud	with	intense	devotion	three	times,	by
oneself	and	by	all	others	present.	May	its	impact	not	cease	until	cyclic
existence	has	been	emptied!

SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya
!	Let	good	auspices	prevail!
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous
Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States
.
3
	
I	bow	down	to	the	spiritual	teachers,	[meditational	deities]	and	ḍākin
ῑ
s,
May	I	be	guided	on	the	path	by	their	great	love.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	bewilderment,
May	the	spiritual	teachers,	holders	of	the	oral	lineages,	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	[radiant]	light,
Which	is	undistracted	study,	reflection	and	meditation.
May	the	supreme	consorts,	the	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	delusion,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Vairocana	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	reality’s	expanse.
May	the	supreme	consort	[Akāśa]dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
4
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	aversion,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Vajrasattva	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	mirror-like	pristine	cognition.
May	the	supreme	consort	Buddhalocanā	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	pride,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Ratnasambhava	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,

Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness.
May	the	supreme	consort	Māmak
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	attachment,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Amitābha	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	deep-seated	envy,
May	the	transcendent	lord	Amoghasiddhi	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.
May	the	supreme	consort	Samayatārā	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	[driven]	by	the	five	virulent	poisons,
May	the	transcendent	conquerors,	[the	male	buddhas]	of	the	five	enlightened
families,	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined.
May	the	five	supreme	female	buddhas,	[the	purity	of]	the	expanse,	support	me
from	behind,
And,	thus	[encircled],	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	light-paths	of	the	six	impure	classes	[of	beings]
And	be	escorted	to	the	five	utterly	supreme	and	pure	buddha	fields.
	
O,	as	I	roam	in	cyclic	existence	driven	by	deep-seated	habitual	tendencies,
May	 the	 assembly	 of	 spiritual	 heroes	 and	 awareness	 holders	 draw	 me
forward,

Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	the	coemergent	pristine	cognition.
May	the	supreme	consorts,	the	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
,	support	me	from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
O,	 as	 I	 roam	 in	 cyclic	 existence	 driven	 by	 deep-seated	 bewildering
perceptions,
May	the	assembly	of	Blood-drinking	Wrathful	Deities	draw	me	forward,
Leading	me	on	the	path	of	radiant	light,
Which	is	free	of	fear	and	terrifying	perceptions.
May	the	assembly	of	the	Krodheśvar
ῑ
,	Queens	of	the	Expanse,	support	me
from	behind,
And	thus	[encircled]	may	I	be	rescued
From	the	fearsome	passageway	of	the	intermediate	state,
And	be	escorted	to	the	level	of	an	utterly	perfect	buddha.
	
[OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ]
5
May	the	elements	of	space	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	blue	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	water	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	white	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	earth	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	yellow	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	fire	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	red	buddha.
May	the	elements	of	wind	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	field	of	the	green	buddha.
May	the	[awesome]	sounds,	lights	and	rays	not	arise	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	infinite	fields	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
May	the	rainbow-coloured	elements	not	rise	up	as	a	hostile	force.
May	I	see	them	as	the	fields	of	the	manifold	buddhas.
	
May	I	recognise	all	sounds	as	my	own	sounds.
May	I	recognise	all	lights	as	my	own	lights.

May	I	recognise	all	rays	as	my	own	rays.
May	I	spontaneously	recognise	[the	characteristics	of]	the	intermediate	states.
May	the	fields	of	the	three	buddha-bodies	be	manifest.
	
SAMAYA!
	
	
Herein	is	contained	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the
Intermediate	States
.
6
	
When	my	life’s	course	is	ended,
And	I	roam	alone	in	the	intermediate	states,
The	loved	ones	of	this	world	can	no	longer	help	me.
So,	[at	this	critical	time],	may	the	Conquerors,	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities,
[Quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	may	the	deep	darkness	of	my	ignorance	be	dispelled.
	
When	I	roam	alone,	separated	from	my	loved	ones,
And	[myriad]	images	of	emptiness	arise,	naturally	manifesting,
May	the	buddhas	[quickly]	release	the	power	of	their	compassion,
And	 may	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 awesome	 and	 terrifying	 intermediate	 states	 be
annulled.
	
When	the	five	radiant	lights	of	pristine	cognition	dawn,
May	I	recognise	them	as	my	own	[nature],	without	awe	and	without	terror,
And	as	the	[manifold]	forms	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	arise,
May	 I	 be	 fearlessly	 confident	 and	 recognise	 [the	 characteristics	 of]	 the
intermediate	states.
	
When	I	experience	suffering,	as	the	result	of	negative	past	actions,
May	the	Great	Compassionate	One	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	the	natural	sound	of	reality	reverberates	like	a	thousand	peals	of
thunder,
May	all	sounds	be	heard	as	the	teachings	of	the	Greater	Vehicle.
	

When	I	am	driven	on	by	past	actions,	unable	to	find	a	refuge,
May	the	meditational	deities	dispel	all	such	misery,
And	as	I	experience	the	suffering	of	habitual	tendencies	and	past	actions,
May	the	meditative	stabilities	of	inner	radiance	and	bliss	[naturally]	arise.
7
	
When	I	am	miraculously	born	into	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth,
May	I	not	be	beguiled	by	the	perverse	prophecies	of	Māra,
8
And	as	I	[freely]	arrive	at	every	place	that	I	think	of,
May	the	bewildering	fear	and	terror,	generated	by	my	negative	past	actions,
not	arise.
	
When	the	roars	of	savage	wild	beasts	echo	around	me,
May	their	cries	be	transformed	into	the	sound	of	the	sacred	teachings,	the	Six
Syllables,
And	as	I	am	engulfed	by	snow,	rain,	wind	and	darkness,
May	I	achieve	the	pure	clairvoyance	of	radiant	pristine	cognition.
	
May	sentient	beings	in	the	intermediate	state,	similar	in	kind	to	myself,
Be	born	into	the	higher	realms,	free	from	rivalry,
And	as	severe	dissonant	mental	states	generate	insatiable	hunger	and	thirst,
May	the	afflictions	of	hunger,	thirst,	heat	and	cold,	be	annulled.
	
When	I	see	my	future	parents	in	union,
May	I	perceive	them	as	Mahākāruṇika	and	consort,
And	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 others,	 being	 blessed	 with	 the	 power	 to	 choose	 a
birthplace,
May	I	achieve	an	exalted	body,	adorned	with	the	auspicious	major	and	minor
marks.
Once	I	have	achieved	birth	in	a	supreme	human	form,
May	I	act	so	as	to	swiftly	liberate	all	who	see	and	hear	me.
And	may	I	not	be	influenced	by	my	negative	past	actions,
But	multiply	and	emulate	my	past	merits.
	
Wherever	I	may	be	born,	in	whatever	land	it	may	be,
May	I	quickly	encounter	the	meditational	deity	of	my	past	lives.
Knowing,	from	immediately	after	birth,	how	to	speak	and	walk,

May	I	remember	my	past	lives	and	attain	the	power	of	non-forgetfulness.
	
May	I	easily	come	to	master	by	study	and	reflection,
The	manifold	stages	of	learning	-	small,	intermediate	and	great.
May	the	country	into	which	I	am	born	be	auspicious,
And	may	all	sentient	beings	be	blessed	with	happiness.
	
O,	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Conquerors,	may	I	and	all	others
Become	entirely	at	one	with	you,	and	come	to	resemble	you,
In	all	your	forms,	your	retinues,	your	lifespan	and	your	buddha	fields,
And	in	every	quality	of	your	supreme	auspicious	marks.
	
Through	the	compassion	of	Samantabhadra	and	the	infinite	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,
By	the	power	of	the	truth	of	pure	reality,
And	by	the	blessing	of	the	mantrins	who	practise	one-pointedly,
May	[every	wish	of]	this	aspirational	prayer	be	fulfilled.
	
This	prayer	entitled	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the
Intermediate	States
	
was	composed	by	the	preceptor	from	Oḍḍiyāna,	Padmākara.
May	this	profound	sacred	teaching	not	be	extinguished	until	all	the	worlds	of
cyclic	existence	have	been	emptied.
	
SAMAYA	
rgya	rgya	rgya!
	
This	is	a	treasure-text	of	
Tulku
	Karma	Lingpa.

13
A	Masked	Drama	of	Rebirth
CONTEXT
This	allegorical	play	portrays	the	experiences	of	the	archetypal	evil-doer
Lakṣanāraka	and	the	archetypal	virtuous	householder	Śrῑjāta	as	they	meet
with	Yama,	the	embodiment	of	the	inexorable	laws	of	cause	and	effect,	in
the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	This	lighthearted	masked	drama	is	still
commonly	 performed	 today	 during	 public	 ceremonial	 occasions
throughout	Tibet,	Bhutan	and	the	Buddhist	regions	of	the	Himalayas.	The
play	 is	 staged,	 often	 to	 huge	 audiences,	 in	 the	 courtyards	 or	 public
ceremonial	areas	of	a	monastery,	often	at	the	time	of	the	annual	10th	day
sacred	dances	commemorating	the	life	of	Padmasambhava.

PART	ONE
Herein	 is	 contained	 [a	 masked	 drama	 entitled]	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth:	A	Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural	Expression	of
Virtue	and	Negativity,	in	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
;
1
	which	is	an	extract
from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching	[entitled]
Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	respectfully	bow	down	to	the	uncreated	Buddha-body	of	Reality:
Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
	in	union;
To	the	unceasing	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource:
The	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Lotus	Deities;
And	to	the	naturally	arising	Buddha-body	of	Emanation:	Padmākara.
May	[all	beings]	be	liberated	in	the	intermediate	state!
	
Having	earlier	presented	the	empowerments	and	introductions
From	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States,	An	extract	from
the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Lotus	Deities
,
3
And	having	introduced	the	intermediate	state	of	reality,	which	is	the	‘great
liberation	by	seeing’,
4
Now	 I	 will	 present	 [a	 means	 of	 demonstrating]	 the	 introduction	 to	 the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth.
5
THE	SCENE
Here,	having	completed	the	previous	introductions	[to	the	intermediate	states	of
the	time	of	death	and	reality],	I	will	present	[in	the	form	of	a	masked	drama]	the
introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth.	The	spiritual	teacher	[should
now	appear	fully	
attired]	in	the	costume	of	Yama	Dharmarāja,	and	wear	a	large
wrathful	mask,	depicting	Yama.	He	is	carrying	a	large	wooden	slate	in	his	right
hand,	and	in	his	left	he	holds	a	large	round	mirror.	Dressed	in	a	silk	brocade
gown,	he	is	seated	on	a	great	throne.	In	his	retinue,	there	is	a	figure	dressed	as

the	black	Ox-headed	Rakṣa	Demon,
6
	
wearing	an	ox-head	mask	and	holding	a
black	lasso.	Then,	seated	to	the	right,	there	is	another	figure	dressed	as	the
Monkey-headed	Elemental	Spirit,
7
	
with	the	face	of	a	monkey,	and	holding	a
weight	and	measure	in	his	hands.
8
	
Other	figures	also	present	include:	one
dressed	as	the	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit,
9
	
carrying	a	wooden	slate;	one
dressed	as	the	venomous	Snake-headed	Demon,
10
	
with	the	face	of	a	snake	and
carrying	a	mirror;	one	dressed	as	the	ferocious	Bear-headed	figure,
11
	
with	the
face	of	a	bear	and	holding	a	bellows;	one	dressed	as	the	awesome	Lion-headed
figure,
12
	
with	the	face	of	a	lion	and	clutching	a	hammer;	and	one	dressed	as	the
Garuḍa-headed	Bird	figure,
13
	
with	the	face	of	a	garuḍa	and	holding	a	saw.
These	figures	with	diverse	[animal]-heads	who	are	attired	similarly	to	Yama,	are
dignified	and	standing	in	rows,	to	the	right	and	left	of	Dharmarāja.
The	deity	representing	[the	deceased’s]	good	conscience
14
	
is	wearing	a	white
peaceful	mask	and	a	white	silk	robe,	and	is	carrying	a	bowl	filled	with	white
pebbles.	The	demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience
15
	
is	wearing
a	black	wrathful	mask	and	a	black	gown,	and	is	carrying	a	bowl	filled	with	black
pebbles.	Before	Dharmarāja,	on	the	right,	is	a	long	white	carpet,	which	is	rolled
out	like	a	white	pathway,	and	at	its	end	are	two	figures	dressed	in	the	costume	of
Mahākāruṇika,	with	one	face	and	four	arms,	and	bedecked	with	ornaments.	They
are	seated	at	the	end	[of	the	white	carpet]	on	a	throne	which	is	hidden	by	a
curtain.	On	the	left	side	is	a	long	black	carpet,	which	is	rolled	out	like	a	black
pathway,	and	it	leads	to	the	door	of	a	dark	room.
Hidden	elsewhere,	in	his	home,	is	a	person	named	the	late	Śr
ῑ
jāta	(‘gloriously
born’);
16
	
while	hidden	somewhere	in	the	corner	[of	the	stage],	is	someone
named	the	late	Lakṣanāraka	(‘hundred	thousand	hells’),
17
	
who	is	a	wrongdoing
outcaste
18
	
of	low	birth.
ACT	ONE
DHARMARĀJA	(
as	he	draws	a	cross	on	the	wooden	slate
):	O!	Ox-headed
Rakṣa,	it	seems	the	time	of	death	has	come	for	a	person	in	their	home	in	the
human	world;	the	indication	of	this	has	appeared	on	my	wooden	slate.

OX-HEADED	RAKṢA	(
calling	to	the	venomous	Snake-headed	Demon
):	O,
Venomous	Snake-headed	One!	Look	in	your	mirror!	What	is	this	deceased
person’s	country?	What	is	his	family	line?	And	what	is	his	name?	Please	look!
VENOMOUS	SNAKE-HEADED	DEMON:	O!	The	deceased	whose	time	has
come	is	from	the	country	of	Tāmradv
ῑ
pa	in	India,	and	he	lived	in	the	city	of
Sāntikāla,	which	is	a	township	of	butchers.	As	for	his	family	line,	he	belonged	to
the	lowest	social	class	of	the	four	classes;
19
	and	his	name	is	the	wrongdoing
Lakṣanāraka.	His	lifespan	has	come	to	an	end,	and	[thus	an	indication	of	this]
has	appeared	on	the	wooden	slate.	Now,	go	[and	fetch	him]!
(
Thereupon,	the	Ox-headed	Rakṣa,	the	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit,	and	the
demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	run	off,	while,	in	their
wake,	the	deity	representing	[the	deceased’s]	good	conscience	rushes	to	his
assistance.	As	soon	as	they	have	found	the	‘wrongdoing	one’	in	his	house	in	the
human	world,	they	tie	a	black	noose	around	his	neck,	and	then	Ox-headed
[Rakṣa]	and	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit	both	lead	him	away	by	the	hands.	The
demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	chases	him	from	behind,
carrying	 a	 load	 of	 black	 pebbles.	 Meanwhile,	 the	 deity	 representing	 [the
deceased’s]	good	conscience	places	[a	mere]	six	white	pebbles	in	the	bowl	for
white	pebbles,	and,	in	embarrassment,	tries	to	help.	Holding	a	white	scarf,	with
his	hands	folded	in	a	gesture	of	supplication,	he	attempts	to	petition	Ox-headed
Rakṣa	[on	behalf	of	the	deceased],	but	this	is	unsuccessful.	Lakṣanāraka	is	then
brought	screaming	into	the	presence	of	[Dharma-]rāja.
)
DHARMARĀJA	(
interrogates	him
):	Hmm!	Who	are	you,	you	black	human
being,	carrying	a	weight	and	measure?	Where	are	you	from?	Why	do	you	not
dare	to	look	at	me	directly?	You	appear	to	have	attained	a	human	form,	but	what
portion	of	your	positive	virtue	is	[now]	left?	Have	you	ever	had	any	scruples
about	committing	
negative	actions?	What	do	you	have	to	say	about	this?	Speak
quickly	now!
THE	WRONGDOING	ONE	[LAKṢANĀRAKA]	(
lamentingly
):	Alas!	Alas!
Permit	me	to	speak	in	the	presence	of	Yama	Dharmarāja!	I	had	an	ordinary
human	form,	my	resources	were	few,	my	food	and	clothing	poor.	I	have	had
many	female	dependants	and	thus	little	to	eat.	I	had	to	take	the	lives	of	many
beings	and	many	years	have	passed	since	I	ate	rice,	for	I	had	nothing	but	warm
[freshly	slain]	meat	to	eat.	Many	years	have	passed	since	I	drank	rice	wine	or
pure	liquor;	for	when	thirsty	I	had	to	drink	water	and	blood.
Nowadays	in	the	populated	areas	of	the	world	there	are	many	who	claim	to	be
spiritual	friends.	They	frequently	teach	about	the	defects	of	having	committed

negative	 actions	 and	 the	 benefits	 of	 having	 carried	 out	 positive	 actions.
However,	I	did	not	go	to	them!	Also,	everyone	would	say,	‘Don’t	persist	in	such
negative	actions,	as	one	day	death	will	come,	and	at	that	time	you	will	go	to	the
hells.	You	should	renounce	wrongdoing	and	perform	virtuous	actions!’
Even	though	they	advised	me	by	saying	these	things,	I	thought,	‘I	don’t	know
whether	I	believe	in	the	hells	or	not,	and	anyway	there	is	no	one	who	says	they
have	been	there,	and	then	returned	[to	prove	it].’	So,	I	said	to	those	people,	‘Who
has	gone	to	the	hells	and	then	returned?	If	the	hells	exist,	where	are	they?	These
are	just	the	lies	of	clever-talking	people.	Under	the	ground,	there	is	just	solid
earth	and	solid	rock.	There	are	no	hells.	Above,	there	is	only	empty	sky.	There
are	no	buddhas.	So	now	while	I’m	alive,	if	I	kill	for	my	food,	it	doesn’t	matter.
When	I	die,	my	body	will	be	taken	to	the	charnel	ground	and	it	will	be	eaten	by
birds	and	wild	animals.	Not	a	trace	will	be	left.	My	mind	will	vanish,	so	at	that
time	who	will	be	left	to	go	to	the	hells.
20
	HA!	HA!’
So	I	did	not	believe	in	the	hells	and	I	committed	negative	acts.	And	I	thought,
‘Even	if	the	hells	do	exist,	they	will	only	be	set	in	some	remote	future	life,	so	if	I
have	sufficient	food	and	clothing	for	now,	the	next	life	doesn’t	seem	to	matter.’
So	it	was	through	this	misunderstanding,	this	lack	of	awareness,	and	stupidity
that	I	committed	evil	acts.	It	happened	because	I	was	not	acquainted	with	the
fact	that	you,	Dharmarāja,	[you]	Ox-headed	Rakṣa	and	[all	you]	others,	actually
exist.	I	did	not	knowingly	do	evil	just	out	of	contempt	for	all	of	you,	who	exist
here	 in	 the	 world	 of	 the	 intermediate	 state.	 The	 fault	 lies	 with	 this
misunderstanding	and	
lack	of	awareness.	So,	now,	all	of	you,	lord	and	entourage,
I	request	you	not	to	pass	judgement	upon	me.	If	I	had	known	when	I	lived	in	the
human	 world	 that	 this	 all	 actually	 existed,	 I	 would	 never	 have	 committed
negative	actions.	Now	I	am	stuck	here	under	the	influence	of	negative	mental
states.	Alas!	Alas!,	since	you	are	a	King	of	Dharma,	be	merciful	to	me!	Be	my
friend	and	supporter!
Underground	there	exists	great	suffering,	Dharmarāja,	so	do	not	send	me
down	there!	Instead,	please	send	me	upward	into	the	human	world!	Thereafter	I
will	never	perform	evil	actions	again	-	only	good	ones!
THE	 DEITY	 REPRESENTING	 THE	 GOOD	 CONSCIENCE	 (
offering	 a
white	 silk	 scarf
):	 O!	 Dharmarāja,	 listen	 to	 me!	 This	 outcaste	 butcher	 from
Tāmradv
ῑ
pa	 has	 committed	 evil	 deeds	 owing	 to	 his	 delusion	 and	 blinding
ignorance,	as	a	result	of	which	he	did	not	understand	[the	difference	between]
good	and	bad	actions.	Since	he	did	not	act	knowingly	or	with	understanding,	I
therefore	petition	you	not	to	punish	him.	He	has,	after	all,	also	carried	out	a

small	number	of	virtuous	actions!
Once	when	six	people	were	unable	to	escape	from	the	current	of	a	broad	river,
he	saved	all	six	-	with	a	virtuous	intent.	As	a	mark	of	this,	I	have	six	white
pebbles.	And	since	there	are	also	other	virtuous	actions,	similar	to	this,	which	he
has	incidentally	accumulated,	Great	Dharmarāja,	I	request	your	forgiveness	on
his	behalf.	(
As	he	says	this,	he	prostrates	three	times	[before	Dharmarāja]
	
.)
THE	BLACK	DEMON	[REPRESENTING	THE	BAD	CONSCIENCE]:	HA,
HA!	Is	this	all	you	have	to	say,	white	deity	[of	good	conscience]!	Are	you	not
embarrassed	to	carry	this	[almost]	empty	bowl!	He,	this	low-caste	butcher,	has
spent	his	life	in	evil	deeds	and	has	robbed	himself	of	his	share	of	virtue.
	
He	has	slain	all	the	animals	he	has	ever	seen.
He	has	taken	warm	flesh	for	food,
And	he	has	drunk	warm	blood	as	a	beverage.
He	has	continuously	spoken	harshly	[towards	others].
In	the	upper	valleys	he	has	slain	innocent	wildlife;
In	the	lower	valleys	he	has	slain	innocent	fish;
And	in	between	he	has	beaten	innocent	beggars.
He	has	defamed	each	and	every	spiritual	teacher,
Burnt	down	a	large	temple,
Polluted	a	great	lake	with	poison,
Burnt	a	vast	mountain	forest,
Beaten	his	parents,	and	destroyed	a	sacred	reliquary.
Now	in	Tāmradv
ῑ
pa,	India,
There	is	no	greater	wrongdoer	than	he!
Look	at	the	mound	of	black	pebbles!
(
turning	to	Lakṣanāraka
)
In	case	you	don’t	recognise	yourself,
Your	country	is	Tāmralipti,	India,
21
And	your	city	is	Śāntikāla.
Your	father	is	the	butcher,	Tripon,
22
Who	came	here	eight	years	ago.
Your	mother	is	the	butcheress,	Pelkyi,
23
Who	came	here	five	years	ago.
You	are	the	offspring	of	these	outcaste	butchers.
Now	you	have	come	here	-	haven’t	you?

The	year	is	the	Water	Female	Pig,
24
And	this	year	your	feeding	[in	the	human	world]	has	come	to	an	end.
All	those	of	eastern	India
Call	you	‘Red-handed	Butcher’;
All	those	of	southern	India
Call	you	the	‘wrongdoing	Lakṣanāraka’;
All	those	of	western	India
Call	you	‘Black	Low-caste	Butcher’;
All	those	of	northern	India
Call	you	the	‘Black	Killer	of	All’.
Your	caste	is	the	black	
caṇḍāla
	caste
And	your	family	line	is	that	of	wrongdoing	butchers.
All	generations	of	your	family	without	exception
Will	take	the	path	to	hell.
When	you	were	killing,	you	seemed	happy;
When	you	ate,	it	seemed	tasty,
But	does	it	taste	so	good	now?
What	use	is	your	clever,	slick-talking	tongue	[now]?
Now	the	time	has	come	for	you	to	experience	suffering,
In	retribution	for	the	million	animal	lives	[you	have	taken].
If	you	don’t	experience	this	suffering,
Then	millions	of	creatures	will	have	lost	everything,
And	you,	Lakṣanāraka,	will	have	gained	everything.
As	far	as	retribution	for	your	crimes	is	concerned,
Even	Dharmarāja	with	his	mighty	stature
Cannot	stop	the	effects	of	your	negative	actions,
The	greatest	of	which	was	burning	down	the	temple,
And	the	smallest	of	which	was	the	killing	of	lice.
This	is	why	you	have	accumulated	[all]	these	[black]	pebbles.
So	it	is	best	if	you	prepare	yourself	to	move	on.
[Get	ready	to]	go	swiftly	on	this	black	path!
[There],	the	sealed	copper	cauldron	[that	awaits	you]	is	wide	and	deep,
The	waves	of	boiling	bronze	are	fierce,
The	fiery	mass	of	past	actions	is	intensely	hot,
And	the	messengers	of	Yama	have	scant	mercy.
Dharmarāja’s	attitude	is	extremely	fierce,
The	weapons	of	past	actions	are	sharply	pointed,

And	the	black	winds	of	past	actions	are	very	powerful.
Now	is	the	time	for	you	to	go	to	such	a	place!
Though	I	really	do	have	compassion	for	you,
I	am	nonetheless	very,	very	satisfied!
You	must	carry	on	your	back	the	weight	and	measure,
Which	you	used	as	a	fraudulent	weight	and	measure!
You	must	wear	at	your	side	the	weapons
With	which	you	killed	many	sentient	beings!
You	cannot	deny	or	misrepresent	these	things!
Now	the	time	has	come	for	you	to	go
To	the	citadels	of	the	eighteen	hells.
(
He	begins	to	lead	[Lakṣanāraka]	away.
)
DHARMARĀJA:
Alas!	How	pitiful!	How	terrifying!
When	one	has	obtained	a	human	form,
One	should	proceed,	with	highly	purposeful	virtuous	conduct,
On	the	path	of	liberation,	where	inferior	rebirths	are	left	behind;
And	[thus]	one	is	never	separated	from	peace	and	happiness.
But	on	this	occasion	when	you	obtained	a	human	life,
You	threw	away	positive	actions	like	dirt,
And	seized	upon	negative	actions,
For	which	reason	you	have	wasted	this	highly	meaningful	human	body,
Which	is	difficult	to	obtain.
Since	you	have	done	nothing	at	all,	other	than	return	empty-handed	[from	this
life],
You	are	[only]	carrying	the	burden	of	your	negative	acts!	How	sad!
Since	the	actions	you	have	carried	out	must	ripen	upon	yourself,
You	cannot	be	protected	even	by	the	power	of	a	thousand	buddhas.
So	I	cannot	respond	to	this,	[your	appeal],	in	any	way!
Since	the	results	of	the	premeditated	negative	acts,
Which	you	carried	out	when	you	had	freedom,
Will	all	come	to	ripen	upon	you,
Even	though	you	wail	and	lament,
No	one	at	all	should	feel	sorry	for	you.
Even	though	you	have	hopes	in	me,
I	have	no	means	to	act	in	any	way.
Since	this	mirror	of	past	actions,	which	reflects	phenomenal	existence,

Truly	depicts	the	natural	expression	of	virtuous	and	negative	acts,
How	can	it	be	that	no	past	actions	will	appear	in	the	case	of	wrongdoers?
When	the	deity	who	is	your	good	conscience
And	the	demon	who	is	your	bad	conscience
Compare	the	black	and	white	pebbles	of	past	actions,
Happy	is	the	man	who	has	accumulated	virtue!
How	very	remorseful	are	you,	who	have	accumulated	evil!
On	this	dangerous	red	passageway	traversed	by	all,
When	you	are	brought	to	trial	by	the	executors	of	Yama’s	rites,
Even	though	you	may	have	been	once	very	powerful,
Here,	it	will	be	of	no	avail!
Now	is	the	time	for	the	hearts	and	lungs	of	all	great	wrongdoers	to	be	torn
apart!
Since	you	have	practised	non-virtue,
This	reckoning	of	your	past	actions
Will	be	quicker	and	more	powerful	than	lightning,
So	by	fleeing	you	will	not	escape,
And	by	showing	remorse,	this	will	be	of	no	help!
How	pitiful	are	the	human	beings	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa
Who	do	not	strive	to	practise	the	[sacred]	teachings!
There	will	be	no	way	of	helping	them.
This	detailed	accounting	of	positive	and	negative	past	actions
Forbids	even	the	most	minute	negative	deeds	-
So	what	are	those	humans	who	have	no	scruples	thinking	of!
Though	the	white	path	of	liberation	leads	to	joy,
And	the	black	path	of	inferior	rebirth	leads	to	suffering,
The	humans	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa	do	not	abandon	negative	actions,
Nor	do	they	practise	positive	actions,
[And],	even	though	they	may	feel	sadness	and	remorse,
Past	actions	cannot	be	remade.
One’s	past	actions	accompany	one’s	body	like	a	shadow.
I	hold	all	rewards	in	respect	of	positive	virtues,
And	I	exact	punishments	in	respect	of	negative	deeds.
Judging	the	balance	and	counterbalance,
I	examine	good	and	bad	actions.
So	even	though	you	have	regrets,	I	cannot	redo	anything.
Now,	even	though	I	am	very	merciful,	there	is	still	no	way	that	I	can	help	you.

Once	you	take	the	black	path	to	the	hell	realms,
You	cannot	be	saved,	even	if	you	were	to	be	engulfed	by	the	compassion	of
the	Sublime	Ones.
So	there	is	absolutely	no	way	for	me	to	do	anything.
The	Conqueror	has	said	that	sentient	beings	must	reap	[the	fruits	of]	their	own
past	actions.
So	now	the	Ox-headed	One	will	lead	you	away!
May	your	negativity	and	obscurations	be	quickly	purified,
And	may	you	then	attain	the	ultimate	level	of	the	buddhas.
	
OX-HEADED	RAKṢA:	Since	it	is	your	own	doing,	even	though	you	may
have	regrets,	what	is	the	use	of	that!	As	for	us,	we	are	not	responsible	[for	your
actions]!	We	have	simply	distinguished	between	truth	and	lies.	If	you	had	no
responsibility	for	your	past	actions,	then	it	would	be	meaningless	for	us	to	harm
you.	Now,	as	this	is	[the	outcome	of]	your	past	actions,	be	off	quickly!
(
Then	he	leads	[Lakṣanāraka]	away	by	a	black	noose,	and	the	black	demon
[representing	the	bad	conscience]	drives	him	from	behind,	goading	him	along
the	path	represented	by	the	black	carpet.	Then	in	a	dark	room	he	is	subjected	to
shouts	of	‘Strike!	Kill!’,	which	cause	him	to	cry	out	in	all	sorts	of	ways.
)
THE	SPIRITUAL	TEACHER	(
then	makes	a	detailed	elucidation,	beginning
with	the	words
):	O,	Children	of	Buddha	Nature,	those	who	have	committed	evil
deeds	will	be	singled	out	in	this	manner	and	their	sufferings	will	be	the	same	[as
those	described	here].	You	will	definitely	have	such	experiences.	So,	whether
this	core	dilemma	besets	you	at	this	time	or	not	will	depend	on	you	yourselves.
From	now	onwards,	it	is	therefore	important	for	you	to	strive	after	virtue,	and
avoid	negativity,	O,	Children	of	Buddha	Nature...
ACT	TWO
DHARMARĀJA	(
as	he	draws	a	cross	on	his	wooden	slate
):	Alas!	Ox-headed
Rakṣa,	there	is	someone	from	a	household	in	the	human	world	whose	lifespan
has	come	to	an	end.	This	sign	has	appeared	on	my	wooden	slate.
OX-HEADED	RAKṢA	(
calling	to	the	venomous	Snake-headed	Demon
):	O
Venomous	Snake-headed	One,	look	in	your	mirror!	Look	and	see	where	the
deceased	is!
VENOMOUS	SNAKE-HEADED	DEMON:	The	land	of	the	one	whose	time

has	come,	is	in	north-east	India.	The	city	is	called	Kāmarūpa.
25
	His	social	class,
among	 the	 four	 classes,	 is	 the	 mercantile	 class,
26
	 and	 his	 name	 is	 the
householder,	Śr
ῑ
jāta.	His	lifespan	and	merits	have	been	exhausted,	so	the	sign	of
this	has	appeared	on	the	wooden	slate.	Now	be	off,	quickly	[and	fetch	him]!
(
So,	all	three,	Ox-headed	Rakṣa,	Boar-headed	Cemetery	Spirit,	and	the	demon
representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	run	off,	while	in	their	wake,	the
deity	representing	[the	deceased’s]	good	conscience	rushes	to	his	assistance.	As
soon	 as	 they	 have	 found	 the	 householder,	 Śr
ῑ
jāta,	 in	 the	 human	 world	 at
Kāmarūpa,	the	Ox-headed	One	leads	him	away	and	the	Boar-headed	One	holds
his	arm,	as	the	demon	representing	[the	deceased’s]	bad	conscience	chases	him
from	 behind.	 Meanwhile,	 the	 deity	 representing	 the	 good	 conscience	 offers
assistance	as	the	deceased	is	brought	into	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja,	who
questions	him.
)
DHARMARĀJA:	O,	deceased	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	have	you	not	come
from	the	human	world?	There	you	had	a	human	body	endowed	with	freedom	and
favourable	opportunities,	which	is	difficult	to	acquire.	You	have	encountered	the
Buddha’s	teachings,	which	are	difficult	to	encounter;	and	you	have	been	born	as
a	man	
in	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,	where	it	is	difficult	to	take	birth.	What	positive	or	virtuous
past	actions	have	you	gathered?	When	you	lived	in	the	human	world,	did	you
practise	 the	 [sacred]	 teachings	 mindful	 of	 [cultivating]	 mental	 virtues	 and
physical	purity?	What	compounded	virtues	and	attributes	do	you	possess	that
would	 enable	 you	 to	 be	 saved	 [from	 rebirth	 in	 the	 hells]?	 Did	 you	 create
[images,	books	and	stūpas]	representative	of	buddha-body,	speech	and	mind?
Did	you	commission	the	writing	and	recitation	of	the	scriptures?	Did	you	mould
terracotta	imprints?	Did	you	offer	water	libations?	Did	you	clear	rocks	from
roads?	Did	you	remove	bothersome	thorns	from	bad	roads?	Did	you	make
offerings	to	those	above?	Did	you	bestow	charity	on	those	below?	Did	you
scatter	barley	dough	and	grain	at	anthills?	What	other	subtle	acts	of	virtue	did
you	accumulate,	over	and	above	these?	Also,	did	you	study,	reflect	and	meditate
[on	the	Buddhist	teachings],	and	did	you	keep	your	one-day	vows	and	fasts?	Did
you	receive	meditative	instruction,	empowerments	and	guidance?	What	other
virtues	of	this	type	have	you	accumulated?	Tell	me	quickly	now!	Negative	past
actions	related	to	the	body	are	killing,	of	which	the	greatest	offence	is	the	killing
of	one’s	parents	and	the	smallest	is	the	killing	of	lice	and	nits,	stealing,	improper
sexual	 conduct	 and	 so	 forth.	 So	 what	 negative	 actions	 of	 body	 have	 you
accumulated?

Then	the	negative	actions	related	to	speech	are:	meaningless	gossip,	harsh
words,	slander,	lies	and	so	forth.	So	what	negative	actions	of	speech	have	you
accumulated?
The	 negative	 actions	 related	 to	 mind	 are:	 covetousness,	 harmful	 intent,
distorted	views,	and	so	on.	So	what	negative	actions	have	you	accumulated
mentally?
Also,	with	regard	to	the	five	inexpiable	crimes	and	the	five	approximate
[crimes],	 what	 negative	 or	 non-virtuous	 actions	 have	 you	 accumulated,
motivated	through	body,	speech,	or	mind?	Tell	me	now	in	clear	detail!
THE	HOUSEHOLDER	ŚRĪJĀTA	(
in	a	terrified	and	trembling	voice
):	May	I
speak	in	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja!	I	am	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	a	citizen	of
the	city	of	Kāmarūpa	in	the	north-east	of	India.	I	also	have	female	dependants.	I
was	a	humble	person,	self-sufficient	in	food	and	drink.	I	was	a	faithful	devotee
who	made	fulsome	offerings	to	all	the	fine	spiritual	teachers	who	came	to	my
district.	I	encouraged	others	to	engage	in	virtuous	actions.	Motivated	by	virtue
and	good	intent,	I	have	restored	ruined	
temples,	saved	many	living	creatures
from	 certain	 death,	 and	 repeatedly	 received	 profound	 empowerments	 and
guidance.	When	I	travelled	around,	I	cleared	dangerous	paths;	when	I	stayed	[at
home]	I	recited	the	Six-syllable	Mantra,	and	I	kept	my	one-day	vows	and	fasts.	I
am	a	householder	who	made	offerings	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels	above,	and
gave	charity	to	those	of	unfortunate	birth	below.	I	am	indeed	a	bodhisattva.	This
is	why	everyone	calls	me	the	householder	Lakṣmin	(‘endowed	with	wealth’).
Such	is	the	unbroken	sequence	of	my	virtuous	actions.
As	for	my	negative	past	actions,	although	I	had	the	intention	not	to	harm	even
a	single	living	being,	since	I	was	submerged	in	the	perverse	world	which	is
cyclic	existence,	and	I	had	a	son,	and	in	order	for	him	to	be	able	to	join	in
matrimony,	I	took	the	lives	of	ten	animals	[for	the	wedding	feast].	I	confessed
the	negativity	of	this	action,	and	recited	the	
Diamond	Cutter
27
	one	hundred
times.
Then,	when	I	and	my	neighbours	took	the	lives	of	many	living	creatures	in
order	to	pay	taxes	in	support	of	the	village	community,	I	too	felt	much	remorse
and	made	confession.	Also,	since	I	had	lived	as	a	worldly	householder,	I	thought
that	I	must	have	unintentionally	killed	[many	insects]	underfoot	and	by	my
hands,	for	which	reason	I	often	felt	remorse.
Since	the	credentials	of	my	virtuous	and	negative	actions	are	established	in
these	 ways,	 I	 beg	 you	 to	 consider	 this	 conduct	 and	 favour	 me	 with	 your
compassion.

DHARMARĀJA:	Well	then,	if	it	is	true	what	you	have	said,	then	you	have
thought	well	about	virtuous	and	negative	actions,	and	about	cause	and	effect;	but
I	shall	consult	the	mirror	of	past	actions	because	you	human	beings	are	clever
liars!	(
He	shows	him	the	mirror
.)	Look,	fortunate	Child	of	Buddha	Nature!	This
mirror	of	past	actions	in	which	phenomenal	existence	is	clearly	reflected	is
clearer	 than	 the	 omniscient	 eye	 that	 perceives	 the	 three	 times.	 When	 it
manifestly	reveals	the	natural	expression	of	virtuous	and	negative	past	actions,
whatever	you	have	done	in	the	human	world,	all	the	virtuous	and	negative
actions	 you	 have	 committed	 in	 the	 human	 world,	 will	 visibly	 appear,
immediately.	So	what	lies	and	deceit	have	you	spoken?	Look	at	this	mirror	right
now!	(
Then,	looking	at	the	mirror
)	Well,	the	virtuous	and	negative	actions	of
which	you	have	now	spoken	are	not	false.	Well	done!	You	will	be	sent	on	the
white	path.
THE	 BLACK	 DEMON	 [REPRESENTING	 THE	 DECEASED’S	 BAD
CONSCIENCE]:	Hey!	May	I	speak	in	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja!	This	bad
person	called	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	has	indulged	his	whole	life	in	negative
actions	and	has	cared	only	for	his	own	long-term	selfish	interests.	His	name	is
householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	and	his	nickname	is	‘monkey-head’.	As	for	this	faithless
householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	his	[birth]	year	is	the	year	of	the	ox,	his	[birth]place	is
Kāmarūpa	city,	and	his	background	is	that	of	the	mercantile	class.	He	engaged	in
the	 following	 negative	 actions:	 Hurrying	 uptown,	 he	 killed	 his	 father	 and
quarrelled;	then	rushing	downtown,	he	fought	with	his	neighbours,	he	threw
stones	at	the	camel	belonging	to	his	neighbour	Śr
ῑ
bhadra	and	although	he	killed
it,	he	denied	his	action	and	lied	about	it.	He	pushed	the	scribe	Prajñāmati’s
young	elephant	over	a	cliff,	and,	although	he	killed	it,	he	denied	his	action	and
lied	about	it.	Now,	we	can	compare	the	pebbles!	How	will	it	be	possible	for	him
to	take	the	white	path?	It	is	utterly	appropriate	that	he	should	go	on	the	black
path.	(
He	pours	three	handfuls	of	black	pebbles	in	[to	his	bowl]
.)
THE	WHITE	DEITY	[REPRESENTING	THE	GOOD	CONSCIENCE]:	May
I	speak	in	the	presence	of	Dharmarāja!	The	householder	Lakṣmin	[Śr
ῑ
jāta]	is	a
most	faithful	devotee.	He	has	strong	interest	in	the	[sacred]	teachings	and	has
avoided	negative	actions.	When	about	five	hundred	miscreants	were	brought	to
trial	in	the	presence	of	the	Mahārāja,	he	offered	five	hundred	
srang
	of	gold,	and
saved	their	lives.	In	the	Indian	city	of	Kāmarūpa,	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta	alone	is
one	who	possesses	great	faith.	Now,	we	can	compare	the	pebbles!	How	will	it	be
possible	for	him	to	take	the	black	path?	He	should	now	set	out,	guided	along	the
white	path!	(
He	pours	out	about	six	measures	of	white	pebbles	[into	his	bowl].
	)

THE	 MONKEY-HEADED	 ELEMENTAL	 SPIRIT:	 Deity	 and	 demon	 of
conscience,	both	of	you	have	no	need	to	disagree,	because	when	I	raise	my	scale
balance,	the	measures	of	virtue	and	negativity	will	be	determined	by	the	weights.
Now,	if	you	look,	[the	outcome]	will	be	obvious.	(
He	weighs	the	pebbles,
whereupon	the	white	[container]	is	three	times	heavier.
)
DHARMARĀJA:	Wonderful!	Those	who	have	obtained	a	human	body,	who
delight	in	the	[sacred]	teachings,	and	fully	realise	their	life’s	potential	-	as	this
[achievement]	cannot	be	stolen	or	snatched	by	others	-	will	themselves	find
happiness	through	their	own	virtues.	With	respect	to	this	way	of	being,	such	as
that	of	the	house	
holder	Lakṣmin	[Śr
ῑ
jāta]	-	how	wonderful	it	would	be	if	all
sentient	beings	were	to	do	the	same!	Supplicate	Avalokiteśvara	right	now,	and
instantly	travel	the	white	path!	(
Dharmarāja	prays
)	I	pray	to	the	meditational
deity	Mahākāruṇika,	at	the	summit	of	Mount	Potālaka	in	the	east!	Grant	your
blessing	that	we	may	realise	the	nature	of	mind	to	be	the	Buddha-body	of
Reality!	(
He	then	recites	the
	Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas	and
Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
28
	
and	then	gives	formal	introduction	to	the	methods
for	obstructing	the	womb	entrances	during	the	intermediate	state	[of	rebirth]
and	for	choosing	a	womb.
29
	
Lastly,	he	confers	the	introduction	to	the	methods	of
transferring	 [consciousness]	 to	 the	 pure	 buddha-fields.
30
	
Immediately
afterwards,	the	curtain	is	suddenly	drawn	back,	and	the	form	of	Avalokiteśvara
is	vividly	displayed.	[The	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta]	is	led	along	the	path	[of	virtue]
represented	by	the	white	carpet,	clad	in	fine	robes,	and	wearing	fine	ornaments.
)
DHARMARĀJA	(
offering	praise
):	O,	Child	of	Buddha	Nature,	this	is	how
one	should	serve	the	purpose	of	obtaining	a	human	body.	Rejoice	[in	this]!
(
Then,	 he	 recites	 the	 following	 aspirational	 prayer	 of	 Avalokiteśvara	 three
times.
)
	
OṂ	MAṆI	PADME	HŪṂ	HRĪḤ!
31
May	all	sentient	beings,	including	you	Śr
ῑ
jāta,
Be	guided	on	the	path	by	the	essence	of	the	Six-syllable	Mantra!
May	cyclic	existence	with	its	three	world-systems	be	churned	to	its	depths,
And	may	the	hells	be	exhausted	and	emptied!
(
He	urges	[all	to	recite]	that	Six-syllable	Mantra.
)
	
THE	SPIRITUAL	TEACHER:	O,	Children	of	Buddha	Nature,	behold	this
distinction	between	the	happiness	and	suffering	experienced	by	the	evil	‘Red-

handed	Butcher’	and	the	faithful	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	in	consequence	of	their
disparate	accumulations	of	virtue	and	negativity!	As	we	ourselves	shall	also
encounter	such	experiences	soon,	it	is	most	important	that	we	strive	after	virtue
and	refrain	from	negativity!	(
Then,	[the	spiritual	teacher]	should	confer	the
empowerment	 [of	 the	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities],	 recite	 the	 auspicious
verses,	and	perform	the	aspirational	prayer	for	the	dedication	of	merit,	followed
by	the	concluding	rite.
)
COLOPHON
How	wonderful!	I,	Padmākara,	having	actually	seen	the	hells,	composed	this
[masked	drama]	as	an	adjunct	to	the	teaching	of	the	
[Great]	Liberation	by
Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	in	order	to	benefit	sentient	beings	of	the
future.	May	it	be	encountered	by	those	who	are	fortunate!
This	concludes	the	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth:	A
Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural	Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity.
32
	May	all
be	auspicious!
33

PART	TWO
Supplement	to	the	Masked	Drama	of	Rebirth
Herein	 is	 contained	 the	
Supplement	 to	 the	 Teaching	 Revealing	 the	 Natural
Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity	in	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth,	entitled
Gong	of	Divine	Melody;
1
	which	is	an	extract	from	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	Samantabhadra	and	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities!
THE	SCENE
(
In	the	context	of	[the	masked	drama	entitled]
	A	Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural
Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity	which	is	[associated	with	the]	Introduction
to	 the	 Intermediate	 State	 of	 Rebirth
,	 the	 one	 called	 ‘the	 wrongdoing
Lakṣanāraka’	(‘hundred	thousand	hells’)	is	shown	entering	the	inferior	realms.
Amidst	the	thunderous	cries	of	‘Strike!’	and	‘Kill!’	uttered	by	the	executors	of
Yama’s	rites,	he	travels	the	black	path,	after	which	Dharmarāja	teaches	on	the
disadvantages	of	committing	negative	actions	to	the	entire	audience	assembled
there.
3
	
Following	 this,	 the	 deity	 representing	 the	 good	 conscience	 [should
appear]	in	a	state	of	sadness,	and	should	urge	[the	audience	to	recite]	the	Six-
syllable	Mantra.
)
ACT	ONE
THE	DEITY	REPRESENTING	THE	GOOD	CONSCIENCE:	Please	recite
the	 Six-syllable	 Mantra	 once	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 deceased,	 the	 wrongdoing
Lakṣanāraka!	OṂ	MAṆI	PADME	HŪṂ	HRĪḤ!	Please	recite	the	Six-syllable
Mantra	once	on	behalf	of	all	beings	present	within	the	intermediate	state	[of

rebirth]!	(
Then	speaking	to	the	assembled	audience
)	O	listen!	I	am	the	one	called
deity	of	good	conscience.	This	wrongdoing	Lakṣanāraka	has	committed	many
negative	actions,	as	a	result	of	which,	at	this	moment,	in	the	whole	world,	I	can
only	find	six	tiny	white	pebbles	representing	his	virtuous	actions,	but	there	are
innumerable	pebbles	[here]	representing	his	non-virtuous	past	actions.	[Now],	by
the	power	of	his	bad	past	actions,	he	has	been	led	away	to	the	hells	by	the
executors	of	Yama’s	rites.	Although	I	wanted	to	guide	him	to	higher	rebirths,	I
have	been	unable	to	find	a	way	[to	help	him].
All	of	you	who	inhabit	the	human	world	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa,	and	all	of	you
gathered	here,	should	not	now	engage	in	negative	actions	but	practise	only
virtue.	These	following	messages	are	the	ones	which	we	[now]	send	to	you
[from	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth]!	(
Then,	circumambulating	the	maṇḍala,
4
and	chanting	the	Six-syllable	Mantra	in	a	melodious	voice,	he	continues	with	a
sad	demeanour.
)
	
How	wonderful!	I	pray	to	gracious	Dharmarāja,
Glorious	embodiment	of	the	activities	of	the	buddhas	of	the	three	times,
Who	manifests	for	the	benefit	of	beings!
Alas!	Listen	and	be	attentive,	all	you	gathered	here!
[Considering]	the	difficulties	of	obtaining	a	human	form,
All	those	who	commit	non-virtuous	and	negative	acts	[while	living	in	the
world]
Will	have	missed	the	opportunity	of	escaping	from	this	ocean	of	suffering.
All	[such]	beings	living	in	this	world,
Who	are	[all]	powerless	to	remain	[in	the	world]	for	long,
Will	feel	remorse	when	entering	the	jaws	of	the	Lord	of	Death.
But	[this	remorse]	will	be	of	no	benefit	to	them	then	-
For,	despite	their	sorrows,	they	will	be	obliged	to	move	on!
All	peoples	of	the	past	have	gathered	family	and	wealth	[around	them],
Hoping	these	would	last	forever	-
But,	when	[their	own]	impermanence	and	death	arrive,
They	set	out	alone,	devoid	of	refuge	or	sanctuary.
The	relatives	and	friends	surrounding	us	in	this	life
Are	like	a	gathering	of	shoppers	at	a	market.
Although	they	seem	close	to	us,	they	are	not	dependable.
When	the	market	closes,	the	shoppers	will	disperse.
[Likewise,]	this	illusory	aggregate	of	form,

Like	a	fallen	cairn	at	the	top	of	a	pass,
Will	be	severed	of	all	its	flesh	and	bones.
This	our	body	is	not	to	be	relied	on!
Even	though	we	have	cherished	this	body,
[A	collection]	of	pus,	blood,	serum,	and	sinews,
It	is	nonetheless	[ever]	on	the	verge	of	disintegration.
Even	though	we	miss	it,	birds	and	dogs	will	devour	it,
Even	though	we	[try	to	sustain	it	by]	engaging	in	ritual	services,
It	will	be	snatched	away	by	Yama,	the	lord	of	death.
This	body	composed	of	the	four	elements	will	be	left	behind	on	the	earth,
Our	consciousness	will	travel	as	a	wanderer	through	the	intermediate	states,
And	the	habitual	tendencies	of	our	negative	past	actions	will	follow	like	a
shadow.
How	pitiful	that	we	have	committed	non-virtuous	actions!
The	deity	and	demon	representing	our	good	and	bad	conscience
Will	compare	the	white	and	black	pebbles	of	past	actions,
And	Dharmarāja	will	reveal	all	in	the	[all-seeing]	mirror.
All	great	wrongdoers	will	suffer	these	torments.
Even	though	they	should	not	commit	even	the	slightest	negative	acts,
The	human	beings	of	Jambudv
ῑ
pa	are	let	down	by	wrongdoing!
It	is	by	engaging	in	virtue	that	they	will	be	reborn	in	the	higher	realms,
And	by	engaging	in	negativity	that	they	will	travel	to	the	hells.
At	this	one	time,	when	one	has	attained	a	human	body,
But	failed	to	return	with	at	least	some	virtue,
What	a	pity	it	is	that	we	carry	the	[alternative]	burden	of	negativity,
And	bring	sufferings	upon	ourselves!
The	hunters	in	the	mountains,
The	fishermen	by	the	rivers,
And	those	who	kill	domestic	livestock
Will	transmigrate	and	be	reborn	in	the	eighteen	hells.
Those	who	engage	in	deceit	and	deception,
Having	adulterated	measures	and	weights,
And	those	who	steal,	plunder	or	deceive
Will	long	roam	through	the	three	inferior	existences.
Those	bound	to	their	wealth	by	the	knot	of	miserliness,
Those	who	squander	the	property	of	others,
And	those	who	appropriate	donations	made	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels,

Will	long	roam	through	the	realms	of	anguished	spirits.
This,	the	impact	of	non-virtuous	past	actions
Is	like	a	thunderbolt,	it	is	extremely	powerful.
And	even	though	we	feel	remorse,	it	will	be	of	no	help	-
We	will	not	be	able	to	escape!
The	punishment	for	negative	actions	is	exacted	by	Yama.
In	this	dangerous	passageway,	traversed	by	all,
The	executors	of	Yama’s	rites	bring	us	to	trial.
Pity	those	human	beings	who	do	not	avoid	negativity	-
For	there	is	no	way	to	help	them.
How	severe	is	the	attitude	of	Dharmarāja!
How	precise	is	the	accounting	of	the	deity	and	demon	of	conscience!
How	remorseful	are	the	great	wrongdoers!
Only	by	engaging	in	virtue,	will	one	proceed	to	higher	rebirths.
Alas!	The	body	ages	day	by	day.
The	lifespan	is	consumed	moment	by	moment.
Dying	in	turn,	one	after	another,
Sentient	beings	of	this	errant	degenerate	age
Have	lifespans	shorter	than	the	tail	of	a	sheep!
All	householders	with	many	dependants,	[such	as	this	wrongdoer],
Will	reap	the	fruits	of	their	evil	past	actions	in	so	many	ways,
And	even	their	relatives	and	friends	will	[one	day]	arise	as	their	enemies.
In	these	bad	times,	keeping	a	household	[can	in	itself]	engender	sorrow.
Now,	[therefore],	having	attained	a	human	body,
Endowed	with	freedom	and	favourable	opportunities,
Direct	your	thought	towards	your	own	mind!
The	critical	point	is	to	concentrate	on	the	sacred	teachings!
Then,	you	will	be	happy	in	this	life	and	joyful	in	the	next.
ACT	TWO
(
Then	again,	[in	the	masked	drama	of	rebirth],	when	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta	is
shown	setting	off	for	the	realms	of	higher	rebirth,	he	prays	in	the	presence	of
Avalokiteśvara,	and	after	[Dharmarāja]	has	finished	reciting	the	aspirational
prayer	of	Avalokiteśvara	on	behalf	of	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	the	householder	is	adorned	with
fine	ornaments,	and	installed	upon	a	throne.	Then,	before	the	multitude	of	the

five	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s	arrive	to	welcome	him	with	music	and	song,	at	that	time,	the
deity	of	good	conscience	should	joyfully	make	the	following	prayer,	telling	of	the
advantages	of	abandoning	negativity	and	practising	virtue.
5
	)
	
THE	DEITY	REPRESENTING	THE	GOOD	CONSCIENCE:
I	pray	to	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,
Who	abide	in	Akaniṣṭha,	the	palace	of	reality’s	expanse!
I	pray	to	Vajradhara,	[lord	of]	the	sixth	[enlightened	family],
Who	abides	in	the	Buddha	field	of	the	Dense	Array.
I	pray	to	the	Teacher	Vajrasattva,
Who	abides	in	the	Buddha	field	of	Abhirati.
I	pray	to	the	awareness	holder	Prahevajra,
Who	abides	in	the	maṇḍala	of	spiralling	rainbow	lights!
6
I	pray	to	the	learned	Śr
ῑ
	Siṃha,
Who	abides	in	the	assembly	hall	of	Dhanakośa.
I	pray	to	Padmākara	of	Oḍḍiyāna,
Who	abides	in	the	celestial	palace	of	Lotus	Light!
I	pray	to	the	ḍākin
ῑ
	Yeshe	Tsogyal,
Who	abides	in	the	pure	palace	of	the	sky-farers!
I	pray	to	the	accomplished	master	Karma	Lingpa,
Who	abides	in	the	buddha	field	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation!
I	pray	to	his	spiritual	son	Nyinda	Choje,
Who	abides	in	the	limitless	palace	of	the	[sacred]	teachings!
I	pray	to	the	peerless	Sūryacandra,
Who	abides	in	the	palace	where	the	benefit	of	living	beings	is	spontaneously
accomplished!
I	pray	to	the	precious	root	spiritual	teacher,
Seated	on	a	sun	and	moon	cushion	above	the	crown	of	my	head!
7
I	pray	to	the	infinitude	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	meditational	Deities,
Who	abide	in	the	maṇḍala	of	the	Conquerors,	which	is	one’s	own	body!
8
I	pray	to	the	protectors	of	the	[sacred]	teachings	Magon	Chamdrel,
Who	abide	in	the	palace	of	the	transmitted	precepts	and	commitments!
	
How	wonderful!
At	this	time	when	we	have	obtained	a	human	body,
Endowed	with	freedom	and	favourable	opportunities,

How	amazing	are	our	positive	virtues!
At	this	time	when	our	five	sense-faculties	are	intact,
How	amazing	it	is	to	be	attracted	by	the	[sacred]	teachings!
At	this	time	when	we	have	encountered	the	Buddha’s	teaching,
How	amazing	it	is	to	abandon	non-virtue	and	negativity!
At	this	time	when	we	possess	illusory	wealth	and	property,
How	wonderful	it	is	to	offer	these	upwards	to	the	Three	Precious	Jewels	and
downwards	as	charity!
Once	we	have	abandoned	negativity,	there	will	be	no	more	inferior	rebirths.
How	amazing	is	this	householder	Lakṣmin	[Śr
ῑ
jāta],	right	here,
Who,	having	practised	virtue,	has	obtained	a	higher	rebirth!
How	amazing	is	this	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,	right	here,
Who	is	now	going	[to	higher	rebirth]	in	a	core-penetrating	way,
9
Without	passing	[further]	through	the	intermediate	state	[of	rebirth]!
How	amazing	is	this	householder	Lakṣmin	[Śr
ῑ
jāta],
Who	has	achieved	happiness	through	the	fruit	of	his	virtue	-
Śr
ῑ
jāta	has	reached	the	highest	summit	of	his	life’s	potential!
(
Thereupon,	the	hosts	of	welcoming	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	adorned	with	the	six	kinds	of	bone
ornaments,	begin	to	dance,	playing	their	ḍāmarus	and	bells,	and,	emerging	from
behind	the	door,	they	come	to	welcome	him,	singing
	
OṂ	MAṆI	PADME	HŪṂ
HRĪḤ	
in	a	sweet	melody
.)
	
THE	HOSTS	OF	ḌĀKINĪS:
	
We	have	come	from	the	land	of	the	ḍākin
ῑ
s.
We	have	come	to	invite	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta!
We	have	come	from	Oḍḍiyāna.
We	have	come	to	invite	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta!
We	have	come	from	Cāmaradv
ῑ
pa.
We	have	come	to	invite	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta!
We	have	come	from	the	Copper-coloured	Mountain.
We	have	come	to	invite	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta!
We	have	come	from	Mount	Potālaka.
We	have	come	to	invite	the	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta!
We	have	come	from	the	pure	realm	of	the	sky-farers.
O,	great	householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta,

Please	come	to	the	buddha	fields!
	
(
The	hosts	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s	encircle	the	householder,	and	he	too	begins	to	play	the
musical	instruments	[that	he	holds]	in	his	hands	and	to	dance	with	them.	Then
he	exits	together	with	the	host	of	ḍākin
ῑ
s.
)
	
This	
Supplement	to	the	Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural	Expression	of	Virtue	and
Negativity	in	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth,	entitled	Gong	of	Divine	Melody
,
was	composed	by	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso	on	the	third	day	of	the	ninth	month	of
the	sheep	year	at	the	retreat	of	Kharlateng,	in	front	of	the	hermitage	of	Sangye
Rinpoche,	a	place	frequented	by	frontier	tribes.	By	the	power	of	virtue,	may	all
beings	be	established	on	the	level	of	Samantabhadra!

14
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-physical
Aggregates
CONTEXT
As	explained	in	the	earlier	chapters,	this	cycle	of	teachings	contains	a
number	of	instructions	which	can	effect	liberation	from	cyclic	existence,
without	prior	experience	of	the	meditations	associated	with	the	Vehicle	of
Indestructible	Reality	(
Vajrayāna
).	 Amongst	 these	 expressions	 of	 the
sacred	teachings	is	this	
Liberation	by	Wearing
,	which	is	said	to	effect
liberation	simply	by	its	being	worn	as	a	mantra	amulet	on	the	body	at	the
time	of	death	or	by	its	being	heard	at	the	time	of	death.
The	text	of	this	chapter	expresses	the	enlightened	intention	of	the
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities	 in	 the	 form	 of	 mantra-letters.	 These
mantra-letters	are	the	resonance	of	the	pure	awareness	of	the	deities
expressed	in	the	form	of	letter	shapes	and	sounds.
Many	practitioners	of	this	cycle	of	teachings	wear	this	mantra	circle	in
an	amulet	throughout	their	lives.	For	others	it	is	recommended	that	the
mantra	amulet	should	be	worn	at	the	time	of	death	and	not	removed.	It	is
also	recommended	that	this	text	should	be	read	aloud	at	the	conclusion	of
each	reading	of	the	
Liberation	by	Hearing
	
(Chapter	11).

The	Mantra	Circle	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
Herein	 is	 contained	 the	
Liberation	 by	 Wearing:	 Natural	 Liberation	 of	 the
Psycho-physical	 Aggregates
,
1
	 an	 extract	 from	 the	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful
Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
.
2
	
I	bow	down	to	the	primordial	lords,	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,
And	to	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities!
	

This	[text]	is	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-
physical	Aggregates
,
In	which	[the	mantras]	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities,	Those	Gone	to
Bliss,	are	encompassed.
	
How	wonderful!	This	is	a	great	naturally	arising	[mantra	circle].
The	yogin	who	embraces	this	is	immensely	fortunate.
The	yogin	who	encounters	this	is	immensely	fortunate.
The	yogin	who	upholds	this	is	immensely	fortunate.
The	yogin	who	reads	this	is	immensely	fortunate.
As	it	confers	liberation	by	reading,	there	is	no	need	for	meditation.
As	it	confers	liberation	by	wearing,	there	is	no	need	for	spiritual	practice.
As	it	confers	liberation	through	contact,	there	is	no	need	for	training.
As	it	confers	liberation	through	feeling,	there	is	no	need	for	reflection.
This	[mantra	circle]	confers	natural	liberation	whenever	it	is	encountered.
This	is	the	natural	liberation	of	the	psycho-physical	aggregates.
This	is	a	field	of	experience	of	the	fortunate!

[PART	ONE]
How	wonderful!
The	enlightened	intention	of	the	father	Samantabhadra
Manifests	as	the	following	naturally	present	mantra	syllables	of	Atiyoga:
OṂ	 ĀḤ	 HŪṂ
3
	 EMA	 KIRI	 KIRI	 MASTABHALIBHALI
SAMITASURUSURU	 KUNDHALIMASUMASU	 EKARILISUBHASTAYE
CAKIRABHULITA	 CAYESAMUNTA	 CARYASUGHAYE
BHITISANABHYAGHULIYE	 SAKARIDHUKANI	 MATARIBHETANA
PARALIHISANA	 MAKHARTAKELANA	 SAMBHURATA
MAIKACARATAMBA	 SURYAGHATARAYE	 BASHANA	 RANABHITI
SAGHUTIPAYA	 GHU-RAGHURAPAGAKHARANALAṂ	 NARANARAYI
THARAPAṬALAṂ	 SIRNASIRNABHESARASPALAṂ
BHUDDHABHUDDHACHIŚASAGHELAṂ	SASĀ	R
̣̣	Ḷ
	
IĪ	MAMĀ	RARĀ
LAHA	Ā
4
This	is	the	twenty-six	line	supreme	essential	mantra,
Through	which	the	enlightened	intention	of	Samantabhadra
Will	naturally	liberate	mental	apprehension	in	awareness,
As	an	indestructible	chain	of	light,	primordially	pure	and	indivisible	from
Samantabhadra	[when	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death],
While	[externally]	a	cloudless	sky	will	appear.
	
How	wonderful!
The	enlightened	intention	of	the	mother	Samantabhadr
ῑ
Manifests	as	the	following	naturally	present	mantra-syllables	of	Atiyoga.
This	is	the	essential	mantra,	liberating	body,	speech	and	mind	in	primordial
purity:
OṂ	 ĀḤ	 HŪṂ	 EMA	 KIRI	 KIRI	 MASTABHALI	 SAMITASURUSURU
KUNDHALIMASU	 EKARILISUBHASTAYE	 CATABHULITA
CAYESAMUNTA	 CARYASUGhAYE	 BHITISANABHYAGHUYE
KIRIDHAKINI	
DHAKAMAHĀBHORI	 TANAPARALIHĪ
SANAṆKHARATAKELAṂ	 SAMBHUDDARATA	 MEGACARAPATAṂ
TAPASURYAGHATARA	 Ā	 MANAPARABHIHO	 TIṄGHURALA
MASMINSAGHUTILA	TAYA-GHURAGHURA	RĀṆGAKHALARANALAṂ

NARANARALAṂ	 ITHAR-PATALAṂ	 SIRNASIRNABHISARALAṂ
SAKELAṂ	SASĀ	Ṛ
	Ḷ
	
IĪ	MAMĀ	RARĀ
5
This	 is	 the	 essential	 mantra	 through	 which	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Samantabhadr
ῑ
	liberates
The	 dynamic	 motion	 of	 awareness,	 encumbered	 by	 phenomenal
characteristics,	in	unborn	emptiness.
This	is	the	twenty-nine	line	supreme	essential	mantra,
Through	which	liberation	will	occur	in	primordial	purity,	indivisible	from
Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	[when	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death],
While	[externally]	a	clear	and	unobscured	sky	will	appear.
	
How	wonderful!
To	symbolise	the	perfection	of	all	enlightened	attributes,
The	[following]	twenty-five	mantras	which	reverse	attachment	are	presented:
6
	
To	avert	attachment	to	the	sense-faculties,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	KARMA	RAKṢA	GHIHAṂTI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	 will	 confer	 natural	 liberation	 by	 subduing	 the	 beguiling	 force	 of	 the
dissonant	mental	states,
While	[externally]	a	bright	red	rainbow	will	appear.
	
To	avert	attachment	to	the	psycho-physical	aggregates,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	BHIKARAṆA	SO	GAD	GLING.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	confer	natural	liberation	by	subduing	the	beguiling	force	of	the	psycho-
physical	aggregates,
While	[externally]	a	bright	yellow	rainbow	will	appear.
	
To	avert	attachment	to	all	sense	objects,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	BHUGARILABHADHUTRI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	confer	natural	liberation	by	subduing	the	beguiling	force	of	‘deva’s
son’,
While	[externally]	a	bright	white	rainbow	will	appear.
	

To	let	go	of	mental	objects,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	RAMĀKALASAMIKHYE.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	confer	natural	liberation	by	subduing	the	beguiling	force	of	the	‘lord	of
death’,
While	[externally]	a	bright	green	rainbow	will	appear.
	
To	sever	past	sensations,	right	where	they	are,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	MATAMPHAPHERAMITI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	naturally	liberate	the	ground-of-all	[consciousness]	in	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	a	bright	blue	rainbow	will	appear.
	
To	recognise	the	appearance	of	compounded	aggregations,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	KHAṬAREKṢASA	MIG	RLUNG.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	spontaneously	liberate	naturally	manifesting	appearances	in	primordial
purity,
While	[externally]	a	phenomenon	like	the	unfolding	of	dazzling	brocade	will
appear.
	
To	enter	the	stronghold	of	awareness,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	EKARANABHECAKṢA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	induce	the	attainment	of	the	‘irreversible	level’,
7
While	[externally]	
śarīraṃ
	relics	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
To	eradicate	the	continuum	of	bewilderment,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	YARIMUTRASAGHULI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	naturally	liberate	the	three	world-systems	in	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	
churiraṃ
	relics	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
To	successively	liberate	the	six	classes	of	living	beings,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	YASIRAṂ	RLUNG	PALAYA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	naturally	liberate	beings	of	the	six	classes	in	primordial	purity,

While	[externally]	
nyariraṃ
	relics	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
To	purge	cyclic	existence	from	its	depths,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	MAMAKOLINAṂ	SAMANTA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	churn	the	depths	of	all	lower	existences,
While	[externally]	
pañcaraṃ
	relics	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
To	suppress	apparitional	reality,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	GHARILAṂBARIMAṂTI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	guide	[the	deceased]	to	the	genuine	reality,
While	[externally]	
serriraṃ
	relics	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
To	let	go	of	the	‘source	of	the	play	[of	phenomena]’,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	BUGASIṄHAPHAṄGALA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	liberate	the	phenomena	that	arise,	right	where	they	are,
While	[externally]	manifold	shimmering	rainbows	will	appear.
	
To	sever	the	tethers	of	attachment,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	RAMISIPIKHETAPA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	liberate	objects	of	attachment	in	the	expanse	[of	reality],
While	[externally]	a	clear	and	bright	sky	will	appear.
	
To	focus	on	the	chains	[of	light],
[There	is	the	mantra]:	BHIKHUMALABATAṂKE.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	 will	 induce	 the	 ‘visionary	 appearance	 of	 increasing	 contemplative
experience’,
8
While	[externally]	patterns	will	arise	from	the	rainbow	colours	in	the	sky.
To	view	the	seal	of	the	deity,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	SAMANYIVADHERABA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	induce	the	‘visionary	appearance	of	reaching	the	limit	of	awareness’,
9

While	[externally]	the	forms	of	the	deities	will	appear.
	
To	purify	mistaken	views	and	meditations,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	VAJRA	SATTVA	ṬIDHOME.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
Awareness	will	be	naturally	perfected,
While	[externally]	white	rainbow	lights	will	appear.
	
To	simultaneously	reach	the	levels	and	the	paths,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	GHEPASUGHARNAMYE.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
The	levels	and	paths	will	be	simultaneously	perfected,
While	[externally]	the	natural	sound	of	reality	will	resound.
	
To	sever	the	basis	of	views	which	indulge	in	mental	activity,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	DHARMAPATISAGHULI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
Digressions	will	be	liberated,	right	where	they	occur,
While	[externally]	white	rays	of	light	will	appear.
	
To	cause	the	three	buddha-bodies	to	manifest	as	the	path,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	RASMISAMAKHARGAD	TSHE.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
The	three	buddha-bodies	will	arise	as	the	path,
While	[externally]	perceptions	of	light	will	appear.
	
To	cause	the	visionary	appearances	to	genuinely	arise,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	RŪPASAMIMITALI.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
A	simultaneous,	naked	liberation	will	occur,
While	[externally]	winds	and	breezes	will	arise	in	the	atmosphere.
To	terminate	attachment	to	sound,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	ṄATIBALAGILISA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
Liberation	will	occur	in	the	inexpressible,	ineffable	state,
While	[externally]	the	number	of	rainbow	lights	that	are	seen	will	transcend

recollection.
	
To	master	the	levels	of	exalted	meditative	concentration,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	GHACCHAPAYAṂPA	ETAṂ.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
The	singular	perfection	of	the	levels	and	paths	will	be	reached,
While	[externally]	the	number	of	rainbow	lights	that	are	seen	will	induce	non-
conceptuality.
	
To	extend	buddha-activity	to	its	limits,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	KARMĀ	EKANUSA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
Liberation	 will	 occur	 as	 essence,	 natural	 expression,	 and	 compassionate
energy,
10
While	 [externally]	 manifold	 subtle	 relics	 will	 appear	 [following	 the
cremation.]
	
To	avert	expressed	attachment	to	buddhahood,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	SANTRIMAMAKARMĀTA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
The	three	buddha-bodies	will	be	liberated	in	the	space	of	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	a	clear	sky	and	shimmering	rainbow	will	appear.
	
To	discover	the	abodes	of	the	Conquerors	and	their	children,
[There	is	the	mantra]:	ṄALAKHEPAKILISA.
[When	it	is	worn	at	the	time	of	death]
It	will	liberate	all	beings	who	wear	it	and	are	touched	by	its	breath,
11
While	[externally]	rainbows	and	subtle	relics	will	multiply.
	
How	wonderful!
Since	 the	 unified	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 non-dual	 Samantabhadra	 and
Samantabhadr
ῑ
12
	is	naturally	present,
Each	[of	these	individual	mantras]	has	the	capacity	to	confer	liberation.
Thus	they	are	[known	as]	the	twenty-five	seminal	points,	or	mantra	lines,
In	which	reality	naturally	resonates	and	naturally	arises.
SAMAYA

[PART	TWO]
How	wonderful!
Then	 the	 male	 and	 female	 consorts	 [Samantabhadra	 and	 Samantabhadr
ῑ
],
having	entered	into	non-dual	union,
Emit	multiple	male	and	female	emanations,
From	which	arises	the	maṇḍala	of	the	hundred	enlightened	families	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
13
	
Within	the	naturally	arising	diffusive	expanse	of	the	enlightened	intention	of
the	Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities,
Like	the	sun	emerging	from	the	clouds,
This	naturally	arising	enlightened	intention	then	manifests	as	follows,
Within	the	field	of	experience	of	fortunate	beings:
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	BODHICITTA	MAHĀSUKHA	JÑĀNADHĀTU	ĀḤ	is	the
unified	enlightened	intention	of	the	Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities.
Thus
14
	the	mass	of	conceptual	thoughts	will	be	liberated	in	primordial	purity,
As	an	expanse	of	supreme	pristine	cognition,
While	[externally]	the	indestructible	sound	of	these	sixteen	syllables
And	inestimable	rainbow	lights	and	relics	will	appear.
	
How	wonderful!
Then	the	individual	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities
naturally	arise:
OṂ	HŪṂ	SVĀ	ĀṂ	HĀ
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis
15
	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	five	male	buddhas	of	the	enlightened
families.
Thus,	the	five	psycho-physical	aggregates	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	they	will	arise	as	the	five	pristine	cognitions,
While	 [externally]	 five	 kinds	 of	 bone	 relic	 will	 appear	 [following	 the

cremation].
	
MŪṂ	LĀṂ	MĀṂ	PHYĀṂ	TĀṂ
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	 the	 form	 of	 these	 seed-syllables	 of	 the	 five	 female	 buddhas	 of	 the
enlightened	families.
Thus,	the	five	elements	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	they	will	arise	inseparably	from	the	five	female	buddhas,
While	[externally]	five-coloured	rainbows	will	appear.
	
OṂ	JINAJIK	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vairocana.
Thus	the	aggregate	of	form	will	be	liberated	in	the	pristine	cognition	of
reality’s	expanse,
While	[externally]	white	rainbow	lights	will	shine,
And	five-coloured	
pañcaraṃ
	relics,	indicating	attainment	of	the	five	buddha-
bodies,
Will	be	retrieved	from	the	heart	[following	cremation],
For	which	reason	these	are	known	as	the	‘supreme	bone	relics	of	the	Tathāgata
family’.
	
HŪṂ	VAJRADHṚK	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vajrasattva.
Thus	 the	 aggregate	 of	 consciousness	 will	 be	 liberated	 in	 the	 mirror-like
pristine	cognition,
While	[externally]	blue	rainbow	lights	will	shine,
And	 blue-coloured	
churiraṃ
	 relics,	 indicating	 an	 increase	 in	 enlightened
attributes,
Will	be	retrieved	from	the	blood	[following	cremation],
For	which	reason	these	are	known	as	the	‘supreme	bone	relics	of	the	Vajra
family’.
SVĀ	RATNADHṚK	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Ratnasambhava.
Thus	the	aggregate	of	feeling	will	be	liberated	in	the	pristine	cognition	of
sameness,
While	[externally]	yellow	rainbow	lights	will	shine,
And	yellow-coloured	
seriraṃ
	relics,	indicating	the	fulfilment	of	all	wishes,
Will	be	retrieved	from	the	serous	fluid	[following	cremation],
For	which	reason	these	are	known	as	the	‘supreme	bone	relics	of	the	Ratna

family’.
	
ĀṂ	ĀROLIK	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Amitābha.
Thus	the	aggregate	of	perception	will	be	liberated	in	the	pristine	cognition	of
discernment,
While	[externally]	red	rainbow	lights	will	shine,
And	red-coloured	
śar
ῑ
raṃ
	relics,	indicating	attainment	of	the	unborn	reality,
Will	be	retrieved	from	the	flesh	[following	cremation],
For	which	reason	these	are	known	as	the	‘supreme	bone	relics	of	the	Padma
family’.
	
HĀ	PRAJÑĀDHṚK	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Amoghasiddhi.
Thus	the	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies	will	be	liberated	in	the	pristine
cognition	of	accomplishment,
While	[externally]	green	rainbow	lights	will	shine,
And	 green-coloured	
nyariraṃ
	 relics,	 indicating	 the	 attainment	 of	 the
emanational	body,
Will	be	retrieved	from	the	marrow	[following	cremation],
For	which	reason	these	are	known	as	the	‘supreme	bone	relics	of	the	Karma
family’.
	
MŪṂ	DHĀTVĪŚVARĪ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	[Ākāśa]dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
Thus	the	appearances	of	the	space	[element]	will	be	naturally	liberated,
While	[externally]	piercing	white
16
	rainbow	lights	will	shine	in	the	sky.
LĀṂ	DVEṢARATI	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Buddhalocanā.
Thus	the	earth	element	will	be	naturally	liberated,
While	[externally]	piercing	yellow	rainbow	lights	will	shine	in	the	sky.
	
MĀṂ	MOHARATI	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Māmak
ῑ.
Thus	the	water	element	will	be	naturally	liberated,
While	[externally]	piercing	blue	rainbow	lights	will	shine	in	the	sky.
	
PĀṂ	RĀGARATI	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ.
Thus	the	fire	element	will	be	naturally	liberated,
While	[externally]	piercing	red	rainbow	lights	will	shine	in	the	sky.
	

TĀṂ	VAJRARATI	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Samayatārā.
Thus	the	wind	element	will	be	naturally	liberated,
While	[externally]	piercing	green	rainbow	lights	will	shine	in	the	sky.
	
KṢIṂ	MAI	HŪṂ	TRĀṂ	HRĪḤ	MŪṂ	THLĪṂ	JIṂ
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Eight	Male	Bodhisattvas.
Thus	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	the	eight	male	bodhisattvas,
While	[externally]	many	subtle	relics	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
KṢIṂ	 HI	 RĀJĀYA	 SVĀHĀ	 [is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 the	 male
bodhisattva	Kṣitigarbha].
Thus	visual	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Kṣitigarbha.
	
MAI	 DHARAṆĪ	 SVĀHĀ	 [is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 the	 male
bodhisattva	Maitreya].
Thus	auditory	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Maitreya.
HŪṂ	 SARĀJĀYA	 SVĀHĀ	 [is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 the	 male
bodhisattva	Samantabhadra].
Thus	olfactory	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Samantabhadra.
	
TRĀṂ	Ā	GARBHAYAḤ	SVĀHĀ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	the	male
bodhisattva	Akāśagarbha].
Thus	gustatory	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Akāśagarbha.
	
HRĪḤ	HA	HŪṂ	PADMĀBHATAMAḤ	SVĀHĀ	[is	the	enlightened	intention
of	the	male	bodhisattva	Avalokiteśvara].
Thus	tactile	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Avalokiteśvara.
	
MŪṂ	ŚRĪ	ĀṂ	RĀGĀYA	SVĀHĀ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	the	male

bodhisattva	Mañjuśr
ῑ
].
17
Thus	mental	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Mañjuśr
ῑ.
	
THLĪṂ	NISĀRAMBHĀYA	SVĀHĀ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	the	male
bodhisattva	Nivāraṇaviṣkambhin].
Thus	the	ground-of-all	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Nivāraṇaviṣkambhin.
	
JIṂ	KURUPĀṆI	HRĪḤ	SVĀHĀ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	the	male
bodhisattva	Vajrapāṇi].
Thus	the	dissonant	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Vajrapāṇi.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Eight	Male	Bodhisattvas
The	eight	classes	of	consciousness	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	diverse,	shimmering	rainbow	lights	will	appear.
18
HŪṂ	HŪṂ	TRĀṂ	JAḤ	HRĪḤ	VAṂ	HOḤ	ĀḤ
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Eight	Female	Bodhisattvas.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	eight	objects	of	consciousness	will
be	naturally	liberated,
[And	arise	inseparably	from	the	eight	female	bodhisattvas],
While	[externally],	a	shower	of	flowers	will	fall.
	
HŪṂ	LĀSYE	SAMAYAS	TVAṂ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Lāsyā].
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 physical	 form	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Lāsyā.
	
HŪṂ	PUṢPE	ĀVEŚĀ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Puṣpā].
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	past	events	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Puṣpā.
	
TRĀṂ	MĀLYE	SAMAYA	HOḤ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Mālyā].
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	apparent	phenomena	will	be	naturally

liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Mālyā.
	
JAḤ	DHŪPE	PRAVEŚAYAS	TVAṂ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Dhūpā].
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	objects	of	smell	will	be	naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Dhūpā.
	
HRĪḤ	GĪTI	RĀGO’HAṂ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	G
ῑ
tā].
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	objects	of	sound	will	be	naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	G
ῑ
tā.
VAṂ	DĪPASUKHINĪ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Alokā].
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 future	 events	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Alokā.
	
HOḤ	GANDHE	CITTA	HOḤ	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Gandhā].
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 present	 events	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Gandhā.
	
ĀḤ	NṚTI	RĀGAYĀMI	[is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Nart
ῑ
].
19
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 objects	 of	 taste	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	Nart
ῑ.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Eight	Female	Bodhisattvas,
Mental	constructs	associated	with	the	eight	objects	of	consciousness	will	be
naturally	liberated,
While	[externally],	a	shower	of	flowers	and	sounds	of	music	will	manifest,	as
the	transfer	of	consciousness	occurs.
	
KRIṂ	PRAṂ	TRUṂ	KṢAṂ	SRUṂ	YE
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise

In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Six	Sages.
Thus	the	six	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	naturally	liberated,
The	womb	entrances	of	the	six	classes	of	beings	will	be	obstructed,
And	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	will	continuously	manifest	for	the	benefit
of	sentient	beings,
While	 [externally]	 manifold	 subtle	 relics	 will	 appear	 [following	 the
cremation].
	
OṂ	MUNI	KRIṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Devendra	Śakra.
Thus	pride,	the	entrance	to	the	god	realms,	will	be	obstructed.
OṂ	MUNI	PRAṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vemacitra.
Thus	envy,	the	entrance	to	the	antigod	realm,	will	be	obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	TRUṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Sākyamuni.
Thus	desire,	the	entrance	to	the	human	realm,	will	be	obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	KṢAṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Sthirasiṃha.
Thus	delusion,	the	entrance	to	the	animal	realm,	will	be	obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	SRUṂ	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Jvālamukha.
Thus	 miserliness,	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 anguished-spirit	 realms,	 will	 be
obstructed.
	
OṂ	MUNI	YE	SVĀHĀ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Dharmarāja.
Thus	hatred,	the	entrance	to	the	hell	realms,	will	be	obstructed.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Six	Emanational	Sages,
The	entrances	to	the	six	imperfect	classes	of	existence	will	be	obstructed,
And	the	[altruistic]	activities	of	the	pure	emanational	bodies	will	manifest,
While	[externally]	shimmering	rainbows	will	appear	amidst	the	clouds.
	
HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	JAḤ	HŪṂ	VAṂ	HOḤ
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	 the	 form	 of	 these	 [seed	 syllables	 of]	 the	 Eight	 Male	 and	 Female
Gatekeepers.
Thus,	the	entrances	to	the	four	types	of	birth	will	be	obstructed,

And	 the	 four	 immeasurable	 aspirations	 will	 grow	 within	 the	 mental
continuum,
While	[externally]	the	four	corresponding	rainbow	lights	[white,	yellow,	red
and	green]	will	appear	[following	the	cremation].
	
OṂ	VAJRAKRODHA	VIJAYA	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vijaya.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	eternalism	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	all	acts	of	pacification	will	be	accomplished.
	
OṂ	VAJRAKRODHA	YAMĀNTAKA	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of
Yamāntaka.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	nihilism	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	all	acts	of	enrichment	will	be	accomplished.
	
OṂ	PADMĀNTAKṚT	HAYAGRĪVA	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of
Hayagr
ῑ
varāja.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	egoism	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	all	acts	of	subjugation	will	be	accomplished.
	
OṂ	VAJRAKRODHA	AMṚTAKUṆḌALI	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention
of	Amṛtakuṇḍalin.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	substantialism
20
	will	be	naturally
liberated,
And	all	acts	of	wrath	will	be	accomplished.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Four	Male	Gatekeepers,
The	 four	 extremes,	 including	 eternalism	 and	 nihilism,	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	the	four	enlightened	activities	will	be	accomplished,
While	[externally]	the	[four]	corresponding	rainbow	lights	-	white,	yellow,	red
and	green,	will	appear.
OṂ	VAJRĀṄKUŚĀ	JAḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Aṅkuśā.
Thus	the	entrance	to	miraculous	birth	will	be	obstructed,
And	immeasurable	compassion	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum.
	
OṂ	VAJRAPĀŚĀ	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Pāśā.

Thus	the	entrance	to	womb	birth	will	be	obstructed,
And	immeasurable	loving	kindness	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum.
	
OṂ	VAJRASPHOṬĀ	VAṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Sphoṭā.
Thus	the	entrance	to	egg	birth	will	be	obstructed,
And	immeasurable	sympathetic	joy	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum.
	
OṂ	VAJRAGHAṆṬĀ	HOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Gaṇṭhā.
Thus	the	entrance	to	birth	through	heat	and	moisture	will	be	obstructed,
And	immeasurable	equanimity	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum.
	
[Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers,
The	entrances	to	the	four	types	of	birth	will	be	obstructed,
And	 the	 four	 immeasurable	 aspirations	 will	 grow	 within	 the	 mental
continuum,
While	[externally]	the	four	corresponding	rainbow	lights	[white,	yellow,	red
and	green]	will	appear.]
21
	
Through	this	expansive	diffusion	of	the	enlightened	intention
Of	the	buddha-mind	of	the	Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities,
The	aggregate	of	conceptual	thoughts	is	naturally	liberated,
Causing	bone-relics,	small	relics,	and	rainbow	lights	to	appear.
22
How	wonderful!
Within	the	naturally	arising	diffusive	expanse	of	the	enlightened	intention	of
the	Sixty	Herukas,
Like	the	sun	emerging	from	the	clouds,
This	naturally	arising	enlightened	intention	then	manifests	as	follows,
Within	the	field	of	experience	of	fortunate	beings:
	
OṂ	RULU	RULU	HŪṂ	BHYOḤ	HŪṂ
	
This	mantra	is	the	unified	enlightened	intention	of	the	Sixty	Herukas.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	dissonant	mental	states	are	liberated	in
primordial	purity,	as	an	expanse	of	supreme	pristine	cognition,
While	[externally]	the	indestructible	sound	of	the	eight	syllables	of	the	RULU
mantra	will	resound,

And	 manifold	 white	 fiery	 lights	 will	 shine	 [in	 the	 sky	 following	 the
cremation].
	
How	wonderful!
[Then],	the	enlightened	intentions	of	all	the	Sixty	Herukas	naturally	arise
individually:
	
HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Six	Male	Herukas.
Thus	the	six	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	naturally	liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	the	Six	Herukas,
While	[externally]	six-coloured	flames	will	appear	[during	the	cremation].
	
HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ	HŪṂ
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Six	Īśvar
ῑ.
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 the	 six	 objects	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
And	arise	inseparably	from	the	Six	Īśvar
ῑ
,
While	 [externally]	 six-coloured	 rainbow	 lights	 will	 appear	 [during	 the
cremation].
OṂ	MAHĀ	KRODHA	MAHĀŚRĪHERUKA	HŪṂ	PHAṬ	is	the	enlightened
intention	of	Mahottara	Heruka.
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	ignorance	will	be	liberated	in	primordial
purity,
While	[externally]	dark	brown	flames	will	spiral	to	the	right	[during	the
cremation],
Unequivocally	 indicating	 an	 irreversible	 liberation,	 inseparable	 from
Mahottara.
	
OṂ	 BUDDHA	 KRODHA	 MAHĀŚRĪHERUKA	 HŪṂ	 PHAṬ	 is	 the
enlightened	intention	of	Buddha	Heruka.
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	delusion	will	be	liberated	in	primordial
purity,

While	 [externally]	 brilliant	 white	 flames	 will	 shoot	 upwards	 [during	 the
cremation],
Unequivocally	indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Buddha	Heruka,
[As	the	deceased	will	be	born	in	the	central	Buddha	field	of	the	Dense	Array].
	
OṂ	VAJRA	KRODHA	MAHĀŚRĪHERUKA	HŪṂ	PHAṬ	is	the	enlightened
intention	of	Vajra	Heruka.
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	hatred	will	be	liberated	in	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	dark	blue	flames	will	shoot	towards	the	east	[during	the
cremation],
Unequivocally	indicating	[liberation]	inseparable	from	Vajra	Heruka,
As	[the	deceased]	will	be	born	in	the	[eastern]	Buddha	field	of	Manifest	Joy.
	
OṂ	RATNA	KRODHA	MAHĀŚRĪHERUKA	HŪṂ	PHAṬ	is	the	enlightened
intention	of	Ratna	Heruka.
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	pride	will	be	liberated	in	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	dark	yellow	flames	will	shoot	towards	the	south	[during	the
cremation],
Unequivocally	indicating	[liberation]	inseparable	from	Ratna	Heruka,
As	[the	deceased]	will	be	born	in	the	southern	Buddha	field	of	The	Joyful.
OṂ	 PADMA	 KRODHA	 MAHĀŚRĪHERUKA	 HŪṂ	 PHAṬ	 is	 the
enlightened	intention	of	Padma	Heruka.
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	desire	will	be	liberated	in	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	dark	red	flames	will	shoot	towards	the	west	[during	the
cremation],
Unequivocally	indicating	[liberation]	inseparable	from	Padma	Heruka,
As	[the	deceased]	will	be	born	in	the	western	Buddha	field	of	The	Blissful.
	
OṂ	 KARMA	 KRODHA	 MAHĀŚRĪHERUKA	 HŪṂ	 PHAṬ	 is	 the
enlightened	intention	of	Karma	Heruka.
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	envy	will	be	liberated	in	primordial	purity,
While	[externally]	dark	green	flames	will	shoot	towards	the	north	[during	the
cremation],
Unequivocally	indicating	[liberation]	inseparable	from	Karma	Heruka,
As	[the	deceased]	will	be	born	in	the	northern	Buddha	field	of	the	Matrix	of
Activity.
	

OṂ	 MAHĀ	 KRODHEŚVARĪ	 TVAṂ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Mahākrodheśvar
ῑ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	apparent	phenomena	will	be	naturally
liberated,
While	[externally]	smoke	will	spiral	to	the	right	[during	the	cremation],
Indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
	
OṂ	 BUDDHA	 KRODHEŚVARĪ	 TVAṂ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	physical	objects	will	be	naturally
liberated,
While	[externally]	smoke	will	spiral	upwards	[during	the	cremation],
Indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ.
OṂ	 VAJRA	 KRODHEŚVARĪ	 TVAṂ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	objects	of	sound	will	be	naturally
liberated,
While	[externally]	smoke	will	spiral	to	the	east	[during	the	cremation],
Indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ.
	
OṂ	 RATNA	 KRODHEŚVARĪ	 TVAṂ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	objects	of	smell	will	be	naturally
liberated,
While	[externally]	smoke	will	spiral	to	the	south	[during	the	cremation],
Indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ.
	
OṂ	 PADMA	 KRODHEŚVARĪ	 TVAṂ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ.
Thus	 mental	 constructs	 associated	 with	 objects	 of	 taste	 will	 be	 naturally
liberated,
While	[externally]	smoke	will	spiral	to	the	west	[during	the	cremation],
Indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ.
	
OṂ	 KARMA	 KRODHEŚVARĪ	 TVAṂ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	objects	of	touch	will	be	naturally

liberated,
While	[externally]	smoke	will	spiral	to	the	north	[during	the	cremation],
Indicating	liberation	inseparable	from	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ.
	
Through	 the	 expansive	 diffusion	 of	 these	 naturally	 arising	 enlightened
intentions	of	the	Twelve	Principal	Herukas,
The	host	of	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	dissonant	states	will	be
naturally	liberated,
While	the	five	buddha	fields	will	be	mastered.
HA	HA	HA	HA	HA	HA	HA	HA
	
The	mantra-syllables	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Eight	Mātaraḥ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness	will
be	naturally	liberated,
While	[externally]	fiery	sparks	will	spiral	and	shoot	to	the	right	[during	the
cremation].
	
OṂ	VAJRA	GAURĪ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Gaur
ῑ
,	the	white
female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	dissonant	consciousness	will	be
subdued.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	CAURĪ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Caur
ῑ
,	the	yellow
female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	beings	of	the	six	classes	will	be	propelled	into	higher	rebirths.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	PRAMOHĀ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Pramohā,	the	red
female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	beings	of	the	six	classes	will	be	steered	away	from	cyclic	existence.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	VETĀLĪ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vetāl
ῑ
,	the	dark	green
female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	liberation	will	occur	in	the	enlightened	intention	of	unchanging	reality.
	
OṂ	 VAJRA	 PUKKASĪ	 HA	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 Pukkas
ῑ
,	 the

yellowish	red	female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	 beings	 will	 be	 propelled	 from	 dissonant	 mental	 states	 [into	 higher
rebirths].
	
OṂ	VAJRA	GHASMARĪ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Ghasmar
ῑ
,	the
green	female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	cyclic	existence	will	be	purified,	right	where	it	is,
While	[externally]	fiery	sparks	will	spiral	and	shoot	to	the	right	during	the
cremation.
OṂ	VAJRA	CAṆḌĀLĪ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Caṇḍāl
ῑ
,	the	pale
yellow	female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	dissonant	mental	states	and	erroneous	thoughts	will	be	severed.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	ŚMAŚĀNĪ	HA	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Smaśān
ῑ
,	the	pale
blue	female	wrathful	deity.
Thus	the	buttresses	of	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	severed.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Eight	Mātaraḥ,
[The	deceased]	will	be	guided	out	of	cyclic	existence,
While	 [externally]	 fiery	 sparks	 will	 spiral	 and	 shoot	 forth	 [during	 the
cremation].
	
HE	HE	HE	HE	HE	HE	HE	HE
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Eight	Piśāc
ῑ.
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	eight	objects	of	consciousness	will
be	naturally	liberated,
While	 [externally]	 fiery	 sparks	 will	 shoot	 forth	 in	 chains	 [during	 the
cremation].
	
OṂ	VAJRA	SIṂHAMUKHĪ	HE	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Siṃhamukh
ῑ.
Thus	cyclic	existence	will	be	purified	in	its	primordial	nature.
	
OṂ	 VAJRA	 VYĀGHRĪMUKHĪ	 HE	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Vyāghr
ῑ
mukh
ῑ.

Thus	cyclic	existence	will	be	purified	in	its	entirety.
	
OṂ	 VAJRA	 ŚṚGĀLAMUKHĪ	 HE	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Śṛgālamukh
ῑ.
Thus	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	purified	from	their	very	roots.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	ŚVĀNAMUKHĪ	HE	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Śvānamukh
ῑ.
Thus	the	depths	of	cyclic	existence	will	be	churned.
OṂ	 VAJRA	 GṚḌHRAMUKHĪ	 HE	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Gṛḍhramukh
ῑ.
Thus	the	three	poisons	will	be	severed	from	their	roots.
	
OṂ	 VAJRA	 KAṄKAMUKHĪ	 HE	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Kaṅkamukh
ῑ.
Thus	beings	will	be	guided	from	the	pit	of	cyclic	existence.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	KĀKAMUKHĪ	HE	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Kākamukh
ῑ.
Thus	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	purified	in	the	creative	play	of	[reality’s]
expanse.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	ULŪKAMUKHĪ	HE	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Ulūkamukh
ῑ.
Thus	the	buttresses	of	erroneous	views	will	be	severed.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
,
Mental	constructs	associated	with	the	eight	objects	will	be	naturally	liberated.
	
JAḤ	HŪṂ	VAṂ	HOḤ
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables	of	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers	[of	the
wrathful	assembly].
Thus	the	entrances	to	the	four	types	of	birth	will	be	obstructed,
And	 the	 four	 immeasurable	 aspirations	 will	 grow	 within	 the	 mental
continuum.
	
OṂ	VAJRĀṄKUŚĀ	JAḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	white	horse-headed
[Aṅkuśā	Vajratejas
ῑ
].

Thus	beings	will	be	pulled	from	the	abodes	of	cyclic	existence,
[And	immeasurable	compassion	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum].
	
OṂ	VAJRAPĀŚĀ	HŪṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	yellow	sow-headed
[Pāśā	Vajrāmoghā].
Thus	erroneous	mental	constructs	will	be	securely	tied,
[And	immeasurable	loving	kindness	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum].
OṂ	VAJRASPHOṬĀ	VAṂ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	red	lion-headed
[Sphoṭā	Vajrālokā].
Thus	the	dissonant	mental	state	of	ignorance	will	be	firmly	bound,
[And	immeasurable	sympathetic	joy	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum].
	
OṂ	VAJRAGHAṆṬĀ	HOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	green	snake-
headed	[Gaṇṭhā	Vajravetāl
ῑ
].
Thus	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	five	poisons	will	be	subdued,
[And	immeasurable	equanimity	will	grow	within	the	mental	continuum].
	
BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ
BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ
BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ
BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ	BHYOḤ
	
The	mantra-letters	of	the	naturally	present	causal	basis	arise
[In	the	form	of	these	seed-syllables]	of	the	Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ.
Thus	the	aggregates	of	bewildered	thought	will	be	purified,
While	[externally]	sounds,	lights	and	rays	will	appear	[during	the	cremation].
	
OṂ	 MANURĀKṢASĪ	 BHYOḤ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of
Manurākṣas
ῑ.
23
OṂ	BRAHMĀṆĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Brahmāṇ
ῑ.
OṂ	RAUDRĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Raudr
ῑ
OṂ	INDRĀṆĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Indrāṇ
ῑ.
OṂ	KAUMĀRĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Kaumār
ῑ.
OṂ	VAIṢṆĀVĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vaiṣṇāv
ῑ.
OṂ	 VAJRA	 PIṄGALĀ	 BHYOḤ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 Vajra
[Piṅgalā].

OṂ	SAUMĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Saum
ῑ.
OṂ	AMṚTĀ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Amṛtā.
OṂ	DAṆḌĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Daṇḍ
ῑ.
OṂ	RĀKṢASĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Rākṣas
ῑ.
OṂ	BHAKṢASĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Bhakṣas
ῑ.
OṂ	RATĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Rat
ῑ.
OṂ	RUDHIRAMADĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Rudhiramad
ῑ.
OṂ	 EKACĀRAṆĪ	 BHYOḤ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 Ekacāraṇ
ῑ
Rākṣas
ῑ.
OṂ	MANOHĀRIKĀ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Manohārikā.
OṂ	SIDDHIKARĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Siddhikar
ῑ.
OṂ	VĀYUDEVĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vāyudev
ῑ.
OṂ	MAHĀMĀRAṆĀ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Mahāmāraṇā.
OṂ	AGNĀYĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Agnāy
ῑ.
OṂ	VĀRĀHĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vārāh
ῑ.
OṂ	CĀMUṆḌĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ.
OṂ	BHUJANĀ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Bhujanā.
OṂ	VARUṆĀNĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Varuṇān
ῑ.
OṂ	MAHĀKĀLĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vajra	Mahākāl
ῑ.
OṂ	 MAHĀCHĀGALĀ	 BHYOḤ	 is	 the	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 Vajra
Mahāchāgalā.
OṂ	MAHĀKUMBHAKARṆĪ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vajra
Mahākumbhakarṇ
ῑ.
OṂ	VAJRA	LAMBODARĀ	BHYOḤ	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Vajra
Lambodarā.
	
Through	these	enlightened	intentions	of	the	Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
,
The	 bewildering	 apparitions	 of	 the	 intermediate	 state	 will	 be	 naturally
purified,
While	[external]	signs	such	as	sounds,	lights,	rays	and	[bursts	of]	fire	and
smoke	will	appear	as	the	transfer	of	consciousness	occurs.
How	wonderful!
The	 innermost	 heart[-mantras]	 of	 the	 Four	 Great	 Wrathful	 [Male
Gatekeepers],
The	subjugators	who	naturally	liberate	the	four	beguiling	forces,
Appear	as	an	unobstructed	lion’s	roar,
Whose	naturally	arising	enlightened	intentions	resound	as	follows:

	
OṂ	VAJRA	KRODHA	KYEMA	KYERI	KARIMASTA	BHALI	BHALI	ATA
EKARASULI	BHASATI	ENILANILA	KĀ	EBINA	ABHISIÑCA
	
This	lion’s	roar	which	subdues	the	beguiling	force	of	the	psycho-physical
aggregates,
[Is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Mahābala	Kumārakalaśa].
Thus	one	will	dissolve	indivisibly	in	the	body	of	Buddha	Kumārakalaśa,
And	liberation	will	occur	in	the	naturally	present	expanse.
	
OṂ	 VAJRA	 KRODHA	 MAHĀMUDRA	 JÑĀNA	 OJASVĀ	 HŪṂ
SPHARAṆA	PHAṬ	SVĀHĀ
	
This	lion’s	roar	which	subdues	the	beguiling	force	of	the	dissonant	mental
states,
[Is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Yamāntaka	Vajra	Heruka].
Thus	one	will	dissolve	indivisibly	in	the	body	of	Vajra	Heruka,
And	buddhahood	will	then	be	obtained.
One	will	be	naturally	liberated	beyond	the	boundaries	of	the	five	poisons,
And	emanations,	and	their	emanations,	will	bring	about	the	welfare	of	sentient
beings.
	
OṂ	VAJRA	KRODHA	AMṚTAKUṆḌALI	HŪṂ	CHINDHA	CHINDHA
BHINDHA	 BHINDHA	 HANA	 HANA	 DAHA	 DAHA	 PACA	 PACA	 HŪṂ
PHAṬ
	
This	lion’s	roar	which	subdues	the	beguiling	force	of	‘deva’s	son’,
[Is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Amṛtakuṇḍalin].
Thus	one	will	dissolve	indivisibly	in	the	body	of	Amṛtakuṇḍalin,
And	buddhahood	will	then	be	obtained.
One	will	be	freed	from	the	sufferings	of	the	lower	existences,
And	enlightened	activities	will	be	accomplished	in	all	directions,	without
distinction.
OṂ	 VAJRA	 KRODHA	 HAYAGRĪVA	 HRĪḤ	 SARVA	 TATHĀGATA
MAHĀPAÑCA	OṂ	ĀYURJÑĀNA	MAHĀPUṆYE	TIṢṬHA	OṂ
This	lion’s	roar	which	subdues	the	beguiling	force	of	the	lord	of	death,

[Is	the	enlightened	intention	of	Hayagr
ῑ
varāja].
Thus	Hayagr
ῑ
varāja’s	accomplishment	of	long-life	will	be	attained,
And,	abiding	in	the	state	of	reality,	which	is	supreme	bliss,
Ignorance	and	other	dissonant	mental	states	will	be	uprooted,
The	 five	 poisons	 will	 be	 liberated,	 right	 where	 they	 are,	 without	 being
renounced,
And	the	habitual	tendencies	of	beginningless	cyclic	existence	will	be	swept
away.
	
[Through	 these	 innermost	 heart-mantras	 of	 the	 Four	 Great	 Wrathful
Gatekeepers],
The	four	beguiling	forces	will	be	destroyed	and	liberated	in	the	four	buddha-
bodies,
While	[externally]	bone	relics,	minor	relics,	and	rainbow	lights	will	appear
[during	the	cremation].
	
[How	wonderful!
Through	 the	 expansive	 diffusion	 of	 these	 enlightened	 intentions	 of	 the
buddha-mind	of	the	Sixty	Herukas,
The	mass	of	bewildered	thoughts	is	naturally	liberated,
While	 [externally]	 sounds,	 lights	 and	 rays,	 and	 bursts	 of	 fire	 or	 smoke,
spiralling	to	the	right	of	the	pyre,
As	well	as	rainbow	lights,	bone	relics,	and	small	relics,	and	other	signs,	will
appear.]
24

[PART	THREE]
How	wonderful!
The	enlightened	intention	of	the	unimpeded	Buddha-body	of	Emanation
Arises	as	the	following	six	syllables,
By	which	the	six	classes	of	sentient	beings	are	naturally	liberated	into	the
expanse	[of	actual	reality]:
’A	A	HA	ŚA	SA	MA
Through	this	enlightened	intention	free	from	origination	or	cessation,
These	six	syllables	which	are	the	six	naturally	present	seminal	points	[of
light],
Will	naturally	liberate	the	six	classes	of	sentient	beings	within	the	expanse	[of
reality],
25
While	[externally],	numerous	subtle	relics	and	diverse	rainbow	lights	will
appear	[during	the	cremation].
	
How	wonderful!
The	 supreme	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 the	 Hundred	 Genuine	 Enlightened
Families
Appears	as	the	secret	hundred	syllable	mantra,
Naturally	arising	within	the	heart	of	Vajrasattva,	as	follows:
	
OṂ	 VAJRASATTVA	 SAMAYAMANUPĀLAYA	 VAJRASATTVA
TVENOPATIṢṬHA	DṚḌOH	ME	BHAVA	SUPOṢYO	ME	BHAVA	SUTOṢYO
ME	BHAVA	ANURAKTO	ME	BHAVA	SARVASIDDHIṂ	ME	PRAYACCHA
SARVAKARMASU	CA	ME	CITTAṂ	ŚREYAḤ	KURU	HŪṂ	HAHAHAHA
HO	 BHAGAVĀN	 SARVA	 TATHĀGATA	 VAJRA	 MĀ	 ME	 MUÑCA
VAJRABHAVA	MAHĀSAMAYASATTVA	ĀḤ
Through	 this	 unified	 enlightened	 intention	 of	 the	 Hundred	 Enlightened
Families,
Degenerations	and	breaches	[of	the	commitments,	and	all]	negativity	and
obscurations,	will	be	naturally	liberated,	without	renunciation,
26
While	[externally],	bone	relics,	rainbows,	lights	and	rays	will	appear	[during
the	cremation],

And	sounds	will	reverberate	throughout	the	universe.
	
How	wonderful!
The	supreme	innermost	heart-mantra,	unborn	and	liberating,	arises	in	the	form
of	the	following	naturally	present	syllables:
A	Ā	I	Ī̄	U	Ū̄	Ṛ	Ṝ̣LḸ	E	AI	O	AU	AṂ	AḤ.
These	 sixteen	 unborn	 syllables,	 in	 eight	 pairs,	 will	 give	 rise	 to	 an
indestructible	resonance,
While	[externally],	they	will	produce	a	clear	cloudless	sky.
How	wonderful!
The	supreme	innermost	heart-mantra,	unceasing	and	liberating,	arises	in	the
form	of	the	following	naturally	present	syllables:
KA	KHA	GA	GHA	ṄA	CA	CHA	JA	JHA	ÑA	ṬA	ṬHA	ḌA	ḌHA	ṆA	TA	THA
DA	DHA	NA	PA	PHA	BA	BHA	MA	YA	RA	LA	VA	ŚA	ṢA	SA	HA	KṢA
	
These	thirty-four	unceasing	syllables,	in	eight	clusters,	will	give	rise	to	an
indestructible	resonance,
Which	is	the	enlightened	intention	of	the	unchanging	[sacred]	teachings,
While	causing	rainbow	lights	and	relics	to	appear	[in	the	pyre].
	
How	wonderful!
The	supreme	innermost	heart-mantra	which	liberates	the	enduring	continuum
[of	phenomena]	arises	in	the	form	of	the	following	naturally	present	syllables:
[OṂ]	YE	DHARMĀ	HETUPRABHAVĀ	HETUN	TEṢĀṂ	TATHĀGATO
HY	AVADAT	TEṢĀṂ	CA	YO	NIRODHO	EVAṂ	VĀDĪ	MAHĀŚRAMAṆAḤ
SVĀHĀ
27
	
These	thirty-nine	liberating	mantra	syllables,	in	twelve	clusters,	give	rise	to	an
indestructible	resonance,
While	[externally]	multiplying	relics	and	[shimmering]	rainbow	lights	will
appear.
	
The	supplementary	mantras	which	symbolise	[the	four]	enlightened	activities
and	[which	are	appended	to	the	basic	mantras	above]	arise	in	the	form	of	the
following	naturally	present	syllables:
	

May	diseases,	possession	by	malignant	forces,
And	the	eight	fears,	together	with	all	negativity	and	obscurations,
Be	pacified	within	the	expanse	of	intrinsic	awareness!
ŚĀNTIṂ	KURUYE	SVĀHĀ
	
May	the	lifespan	[of	beings]	and	all	the	fields	of	merit
Be	enriched	within	the	modality	of	[intrinsic]	awareness!
PUṢṬIṂ	KURUYE	SVĀHĀ
May	the	Three	Precious	Jewels	and	all	cyclic	existence	and	nirvāṇa
Be	controlled	within	the	modality	of	[intrinsic]	awareness!
VAŚAṂ	KURUYE	SVĀHĀ
	
May	all	hostile,	obstructing	forces,
The	five	poisons	and	the	three	poisons,
Be	destroyed	within	the	modality	of	[intrinsic]	awareness!
MĀRAYA	PHAṬ	SVĀHĀ
	
May	[all]	these	naturally	present	enlightened	intentions,
Which	are	the	unique	offspring	of	all	the	teachings,
Naturally	arise	and	manifest	for	the	sake	of	sentient	beings!
[CONCLUSION]
Through	[the	power	of]	this	authentic	precious	jewel,
All	one’s	needs	and	wishes	in	this	life	can	be	manifested,
And	in	the	next	life	buddhahood	can	certainly	be	achieved.
	
This	[mantra	circle]	should	be	accurately	inscribed	in	a	headed	script,
On	a	sheet	of	fine	blue	paper,
The	size	of	a	four	finger-width	booklet,
Using	refined	gold,	the	colour	of	the	Buddha,
And	it	should	be	rolled	up	in	silk	in	the	right	way.
28
[Then],	on	the	eighth	day	of	the	lunar	month,
Coinciding	with	the	constellation	Cancer,
A	yogin	with	pure	commitments	should	consecrate	it,

And	then	it	should	be	worn	[continuously].
29
	
Inexpressible	virtues	and	negative	actions	may	both	greatly	increase.
Therefore	the	[yogin]	should	persevere	in	the	practice	of	virtue	and	act	for	the
sake	of	sentient	beings,
Avoiding	even	the	most	minute	of	negative	acts.
One	who	does	this	in	the	correct	manner,
Even	if	he	or	she	has	previously	committed	the	five	inexpiable	crimes,
Cannot	possibly	fall	into	inferior	existences,	once	this	[mantra	circle]	has	been
encountered.
	
Since	even	those	who	have	not	practised	the	[sacred]	teachings	at	all	can
attain	buddhahood	[in	this	way],
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Wearing’.
Since	all	who	see	this	[mantra]	circle	can	attain	buddhahood,
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Seeing’.
Since	all	who	touch	it	can	attain	buddhahood,
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Touching’.
Since	all	who	hear	it	read	aloud	can	attain	buddhahood,
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Hearing’.
Since	all	who	feel	its	breath	can	attain	buddhahood,
It	is	called	the	‘Liberation	by	Feeling’.
	
Since	there	has	never	been	a	single	buddha	who	did	not	see	[this	mantra
circle],
It	is	indeed	the	nucleus	of	the	[sacred]	teachings.
All	who	see	it	being	inscribed	will	attain	buddhahood,
All	who	come	into	contact	with	it,	by	wearing	it,	will	attain	buddhahood.
All	who	hear	it	read	aloud	will	attain	buddhahood.
Therefore,	it	should	be	inscribed	and	worn	[as	an	amulet].
It	should	be	read	aloud	and	contemplated	in	the	appropriate	way,
And	it	should	be	thoroughly	comprehended	in	every	respect!
	
Except	for	those	fortunate	ones,	with	appropriate	past	actions,
[This	mantra	circle]	should	be	kept	secret	and	concealed,
Because	 those	 who	 have	 not	 accumulated	 merit	 cannot	 comprehend	 [its

meaning],
And	if	they	were	to	defame	this	[mantra	circle],	they	would	proceed	to	the
hells.
This	is	like	an	anguished	spirit	seeing	[nutritious]	food	as	an	enemy!
Therefore,	it	should	be	kept	as	a	secret,	esoteric	instruction.
[This	mantra	circle]	is	a	field	of	experience	of	the	fortunate.
It	is	extremely	difficult	to	encounter	this	[mantra	circle],
And	once	encountered,	it	is	difficult	to	mentally	comprehend.
Therefore,	those	who	do	encounter	it	should	rejoice,
And	embrace	it	with	respect!
	
At	the	time	of	death	[this	mantra	circle]	should	not	be	removed	from	the	body,
And	when	cremation	takes	place	it	should	not	be	removed	from	the	corpse.
As	a	consequence,	liberation	may	occur	through	seeing,	hearing,	recollection
or	contact.
	
This	completes	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-
physical	Aggregates
,
Which	encompasses	[the	mantras	of]	the	hundred	enlightened	families	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.
	
SAMAYA!	
rgya	rgya	rgya	a	gter-rgya
	
This	is	a	discovered	text	extracted	from	Mount	Gampodar	by	the	treasure-finder
Karma	Lingpa.
	
ŚUBHAṂ

Appendix	One:	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	and	the
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
A	 correspondence	 between	 the	 chapters	 of	 Karma	 Lingpa’s	
Peaceful	 and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
	(Dudjom	Rinpoche	three-volume
edition,	Delhi:	Sherab	Lama,	1975-6)	and	the	chapters	of	this	book
History	(
lo-rgyus
)
1)	
Memorandum
	(
Them-byad	zin-bris
),	composed	by	Gyarawa	Namka	Chokyi
Gyeltsen,	Volume	1,	pp.	1-6.
2)	
Legend	 of	 King	 ’Gyod	 tshangs
	 (
’Gyod-tshangs	 rgyal-po’i	 lo-rgyus
).
Volume	1,	pp.	7-13.
3)	
Legend	of	the	Brahmin	Dung-phreng
	(
Bram-ze	dung-phreng-gi	lo-rgyus
).
Volume	1,	pp.	15-20.
4)	
Padmasambhava’s	 Prophecy	 of	 the	 Treasure-finder	 and	 the	 Series	 of
Authentic	Spiritual	Lineage	Holders
	(
gTer-ston	lung-bstan-dang	khungs	btsun-
pa	bla-ma	brgyud-pa’i	rim-pa-rnams
),	composed	by	Gendun	Gyeltsen.	Volume
1,	pp.	21-26.
5)	
Abridged	History	of	the	Lineage	entitled	Jewel	Garland
	(
rGyud-pa’i	lo-
rgyus	 bsdus-pa	 nor-bu’i	 phreng-ba
),	 composed	 by	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyatso.
Volume	1,	pp.	27-48.
Empowerment	(
dbang-bskur
)
1)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Encountering	the	Four	Empowerments:	The
Extensive	and	Elaborate	Empowerment	of	the	Vase
	(
dBang-bzhi	’phrad-tshad
rang-grol-gyi	spros-bcas	bum-dbang	chen-mo
).	Volume	1,	pp.	49-92.
2)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Encountering	the	Four	Empowerments:	The
Extraordinary	 Profound	 Elucidation	 of	 the	 Three	 Higher	 Empowerments
Including	the	Natural	Liberation	Through	the	Secret	Empowerment	of	Great

Bliss
	(
dBang-bzhi	’phrad-tshad	rang-grol-gyi	gsang-dbang	bde-chen	rang-grol-
la-sogs-pa’i	dbang	gong-ma	gsum-gyi	zab-gsal	khyad-par-can
).	Volume	1,	pp.
93-125.
3)	
Natural	Liberation	through	the	Propelling	of	the	Six	Classes	of	Beings	into
Higher	Rebirth:	The	[Middle-Length]	Empowerments	of	the	Natural	Liberation
of	 Degenerated	 Commitments	 Through	 Reparation	 and	 Confession
	 (
sKong-
bshags	
nyams-chags	rang-grol-gyi	dbang-bskur	gnas-spar	‘gro-drug	rang-grol
),
Volume	1,	pp.	127-160.
4)	
Torma	Empowerment:	Meaningful	to	Touch
	(
gTor-dbang	reg-pa	don-ldan
),
composed	by	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso.	Volume	1,	pp.	161-164.
5)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Encountering	the	Four	Empowerments:	Flower
Elucidating	the	Concluding	Sequences
	(
dBang-bzhi	’phrad-tshad	rang-grol-gyi
rjeskyi	rim-pa	gsal-ba’i	me-tog
).	Volume	1,	pp.	165-168.
6)	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Connecting	 with	 Practical	 Application:	 A
Supplement	to	the	Middle-length	Maturational	Empowerment	entitled	Natural
Liberation	of	the	Six	Classes	of	Living	Beings
	(
sMin-byed	sgo-’byed	dbang-
bskur	’bring-po	’gro-drug	rang-grol-la	kha-skong	phyag-bzhes-kyis	brgyab-pa
’brel-tshad	rang-grol
	
).	Volume	2,	pp.	145-228.
7)	
Minor	Annotations	on	the	Rites	and	Empowerments	of	the	Binding	to
Higher	Rebirth
	(
gNas-lung-gi	cho-ga-dang	dbang-bskur	sogs-la	nye-bar	mkho-
ba’i	zur-’debs	phran-bu
).	Volume	2,	pp.	229-238.
Generation	Stage	of	Meditation	(
bskyed-rim
)
1)	
Spiritual	 Practice	 entitled	 Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Habitual	 Tendencies
(
Chos-spyod	bag-chags	rang-grol
).	Volume	1,	pp.	169-200.	
See	Chapter	5.
2)	
Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind:	The	Four-session	Yoga	of	the
Preliminary	Practice
	(
Chos-spyod	thun-bzhi’i	rnal-’byor	sems-nyid	rang-grol
),
composed	by	Nyinda	Ozer.	Volume	1,	pp.	201-216.	
See	Chapter	1.
3)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Degenerated	Commitments	through	Reparation	and
Confession:	 Preliminary	 Supplement	 to	 the	 Generation	 Stage	 of	 Ritual
Purification
	
(
[sKang-bshags	nyams-chags	rang-grol-gyi]	Las-byang	bskyed-rim
sngon-’gro	lhan-thabs
	
),	composed	by	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso.	Volume	1,	pp.
217-232.
4)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings:	Primary	Rosary	of	Ritual	Purification
according	to	the	Assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
,	in	eighteen	sections

(
Zhi-khro	 ’dus-pa’i	 las-byang	 rtsa-phreng	 tshor-ba	 rang-grol	 spyi-don	 bco-
brgyad-pa
).	Volume	1,	pp.	233-325.
5)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Feelings:	Lesser	[Rosary	of]	Ritual	Purification
,	in
three	essential	sections	(
Las-byang	chung-ba	tshor-ba	rang-grol	snying-po	spyi-
don	gsum-pa
).	Volume	I,	pp.	327-352.
6)	
Sequence	of	Meditation	on	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	entitled
Coemergent	Pristine	Cognition
	(
Zhi-khro	sgom-rim	lhan-skyes	ye-shes
).	Volume
1,	pp.	353-367.
7)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through	[Enactment	of]
the	Hundredfold	Homage	to	the	Sacred	Enlightened	Families
	(
Dam-pa	rigs-
brgyar	phyag-’tshal	sdig-sgrib	rang-grol
).	Volume	1,	pp.	369-390.	
See	Chapter
6.
8)	
Abridged	 Homage	 to	 the	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities
	 (
Zhi-khro’i
phyag-’tshal	bsdus-pa
).	Volume	1,	pp.	391-396.
9)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession	in	the	Presence	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	(
Zhi-khro’i	klong-bshags	brjod-pa	rang-grol
).
Volume	I,	pp.	397-429.	
See	Chapter	7.
10)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Degenerated	Commitments	through	Reparation	and
Confession:	 The	 Sequence	 for	 the	 Fulfilment	 of	 Meditative	 Commitments
(
bsKang-bshags	
nyams-chag	 rang-grol-gyi	 thugs-dam	 bskang-ba’i	 rim-pa
),
compiled	by	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso.	Volume	1,	pp.	431-465.
11)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Degenerated	Commitments	through	Reparation	and
Confession:	The	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Six	Classes	of	Living	Beings	through
the	Guidance	of	the	Deceased	to	Higher	Rebirth
	(
bsKang-bshags	nyams-chag
rang-grol-gyi	tshe-’das	gnas-spar/	’dren	’gro-drug	rang-grol	spyi-don	bcu-pa
).
Volume	2,	pp.	1-50.
12)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Enlightened	Activity:	The	Burnt-offerings	of
the	Ritual	Purification
	(
Las-byang	sbyin-sreg	phrin-las	rang-grol
),	composed	by
Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso.	Volume	2,	pp.	51-123.
13)	
Natural	Liberation	through	the	Rite	of	Burnt	Offerings:	The	Sequence	of
the	Preliminary	Practices
	(
sByin-sreg	phrin-las	rang-grol-gyi	sngon-’gro	sta-
gon-gyi	rim-pa
).	Volume	2,	pp.	123-144.
14)	
Abridged	Notes	on	Ritual	Service	Elucidating	the	Meaning	of	Liberation
(
bsNyen-yig	mdor-bsdus	rnam-grol	don-gsal
).	Volume	2,	pp.	239-253.
Perfection	Stage	of	Meditation	(
rdzogs-rim
)

1)	
Contents	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Keys	to	the	Chapters
	(
Sa-bcad
lde’u-mig	rang-grol	gsal-bar	bkod-pa
),	composed	by	Nyinda.	Volume	2,	pp.
255-265.
2)	
Prayer	 entitled	 Natural	 Liberation	 in	 the	 Vast	 Expanse	 of	 the	 Three
Buddha-bodies
	
(
gSol-’debs	sku-gsum	klong-yangs	rang-grol
).	Volume	2,	pp.
267-272.
3)	
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
Without	Renunciation	of	the	Three	Poisons
	(
sKu-gsum	bla-ma’i	rnal-’byor-gyi
gsol-’debs	 dug-gsum	 ma-spangs	 rang-grol
).	 Volume	 2,	 pp.	 273-276.	
See
Chapter	2.
4)	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Enlightened	 Intention:	 Guidance	 to	 the
Experience	of	the	Intermediate	States:	A	Supplement	on	Mental	Training	in	the
Preliminary	 Practices
	 (
Bar-do’i	 nyams-khrid	 dgongs-pa	 rang-grol-gyi
sngon-’gro	rang-rgyud	’dul-byed-kyi	lhan-thabs
),	a	teaching	of	Choje	Lingpa,
compiled	by	Nyinda	Ozer	and	redacted	by	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso.	Volume	2,	pp.
277-302.
5)	
Natural	Liberation	through	the	Ground-of-all:	A	Manual	of	Guidance	to
the	Intermediate	State	of	This	Life
	(
sKyes-gnas	bar-do’i	khrid-yig	kun-gzhi	rang-
grol
).	Volume	2,	pp.	303-340.
6)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Bewilderment:	A	Manual	of	Guidance	to	the
Intermediate	State	of	Dreams
	(
rMi-lam	bar-do’i	khrid-yig	’khrul-pa	rang-grol
).
Volume	2,	pp.	341-361.
7)	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Awareness:	 A	 Manual	 of	 Guidance	 to	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Meditative	Concentration
	(
bSam-gtan	bar-do’i	khrid-yig
rig-pa	rang-grol
).	Volume	2,	pp.	363-377.
8)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection:	A	Manual	of	Guidance	to	the
Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death
	(
’Chi-kha’i	bar-do’ikhrid-yig	dran-pa
rang-grol
).	Volume	2,	pp.	379-400.	
See	Chapter	10.
9)	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Vision:	 A	 Manual	 of	 Guidance	 to	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Reality
	(
Chos-nyid	bar-do’i	khrid-yig	mthong-ba	rang-
grol
).	Volume	2,	pp.	401-417.
10)	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Rebirth:	 A	 Manual	 of	 Guidance	 to	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
	(
Srid-pa	bar-do’i	khrid-yig	srid-pa	rang-grol
).
Volume	2,	pp.	419-432.
Introductions	(
ngo-sprod
)

1)	
Preliminary	 Practice	 for	 All	 the	 Introductions	 entitled	 Exhortation	 on
Impermanence,	Based	on	Escorting	a	Corpse	to	a	Cemetery
	(
Ngo-sprod	thams-
cad-kyi	sngon-’gro	dur-khrod-du	bam-ro	bskyal-ba-la	brten-nas	mi-rtag-pa’i
bskul-mar	ngo-sprod-pa
).	Volume	2,	pp.	433-442.
2)	
Introduction	to	the	Origin,	Emergence	and	Presence	of	Consciousness,
Supported	by	the	Human	Body,	from	the	Cycle	of	Introductions	to	the	Great
Perfection
	
(
rDzogs-pa	 chen-po	 ngo-sprod-kyi	 skor-las	 khams-pa’i	 mi-mo-la
brten-nas	 rnam-shes	 ’byung-’jug-gnas	 gsum-gyi	 ngo-sprod
),	 redacted	 by
Namgyel	Zangpo.	Volume	2,	pp.	443-467.
3)	
Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
(
Rig-pa	mngon-sum-du	ngo-sprod-pa	gcer-mthong	rang-grol
).	Volume	2,	pp.
469-488.	
See	Chapter	4.
4)	
Introduction	to	the	Three	Buddha-bodies	in	Accordance	with	the	Great
Perfection:	A	Supplement	to	the	Liberation	by	Hearing
	(
rDzogs-chen	sku-gsum
ngo-sprod	bar-do	thos-grol-gyi	cha-lag
).	Volume	2,	pp.	489-493.
5)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Conscious	Awareness:	Introduction	to	the	Six
Lamps
	(
sGron-ma	drug-gi	ngo-sprod	shes-rig	rang-grol
).	Volume	3,	pp.	1-20.
6)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Vision:	Introduction	by	Means	of	a	Crystal
(
Shelrdo’i	ngo-sprod	mthong-ba	rang-grol
).	Volume	3,	pp.	21-28.
7)	
Supplement	to	the	Introduction	to	the	Inner	Radiance	of	the	Ground
	(
gZhi’i
’od-gsal	 ngo-sprod-kyi	 lhan-thabs
),	 composed	 by	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyatso.
Volume	3,	pp.	29-36.
8)	
Introduction	by	Means	of	a	Butter	Lamp
	(
Mar-me’i	ngo-sprod
),	composed
by	Namka	Chokyi	Gyatso.	Volume	3,	pp.	37-40.
9)	
Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing;	 Elucidating	 the	 Introduction	 to	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Reality
	(
Chos-nyid	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	gsal-’debs	thos-grol
chen-mo
).	Volume	3,	pp.	41-114.	
See	Chapter	11,	Parts	One	and	Two.
10)	
Great	 Liberation	 by	 Hearing;	 Elucidating	 the	 Introduction	 to	 the
Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
	(
Srid-pa	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	gsal-’debs	thos-grol
chen-mo
).	Volume	3,	pp.	115-162.	
See	Chapter	11,	Part	Three.
11)	
Supplement	to	the	Teaching	Revealing	the	Natural	Expression	of	Virtue
and	Negativity:	An	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth,	entitled
Gong	of	Divine	Melody
	(
Srid-pa	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	dge-sdig	rang-gzugs	ston-
pa’i	lhan-thabs	dbyangs-snyan	lha’i	lhan-thabs
),	composed	by	Namka	Chokyi
Gyatso.	Volume	3,	pp.	163-173.	
See	Chapter	13,	Part	Two.
12)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications	and
Signs	of	Death
	(
’Chi-ltas	mtshan-ma	rang-grol
).	Volume	3,	pp.	175-204.	See

Chapter	8.
13)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
	(
’Chi-
bslu	’jigs-pa	rang-grol
)	Volume	3,	pp.	205-218.	
See	Chapter	9.
14)	
Developing	the	Greatness	of	the	Teachings	of	the	Liberation	by	Hearing
during	the	Intermediate	State	of	Dreams
	(
rMi-lam	bar-do	thos-grol	chos-kyi	che-
ba	bskyed-byed
),	composed	by	Nyinda	Ozer.	Volume	3,	pp.	219	—	254.
15)	
Liberation	 by	 Wearing:	 Natural	 Liberation	 of	 the	 Psycho-physical
Aggregates,	in	which	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	are	encompassed
	(
Zhi-
khro	’dus-pa’i	btags-grol	phung-po	rang-grol
).	Volume	3,	pp.	255	—	286.	
See
Chapter	14.
16)	
An	Abridgement	of	the	Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the
Psycho-physical	Aggregates,	entitled	Nucleus	of	Natural	Liberation
	(
bTags-grol
phung-po	rang-grol-gyi	don-bsdus	rang-grol	snying-po
).	Volume	3,	pp.	287-306.
17)	
Chapter	 on	 the	 Means	 of	 Attaching	 a	 Diagram	 which	 Liberates	 by
Wearing;	from	the	Tantra	of	the	Great	Perfection:	Natural	Liberation	of	Cyclic
Existence	and	Nirvāṇa
	(
rDzogs-chen	’khor-’das	rang-grol-gyi	rgyud-las	btags-
grol	bcangthabs-kyi	le’u
).	Volume	3,	pp.	307	—	313.
18)	
Memorandum	 on	 the	 Actual	 Preparation	 of	 the	 Great	 Chart	 of	 the
Liberation	by	Wearing
	(
bTags-grol	’khor-lo	chen-mo’i	lag-len	zin-bris
).	Volume
1,	pp.	467-492.
19)	
Inventory	for	Insertion	within	the	Casket
	(
Glegs-bam	bzhugs-pa’i	dkar-
chag
).	Volume	1,	pp.	493-499.
20)	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	drug-gi	rtsa-tshig
).
Volume	3,	pp.	316-318.	
See	Chapter	3.
21)	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous	Pathways	of	the
Intermediate	 States
	 (
Bar-do’i	 ’phrang-sgrol
).	 Volume	 3,	 pp.	 318-322.	
See
Chapter	12.
22)	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the	Intermediate	States
(
Bar-do’i	’jigs-skyobs-kyi	smon-lam
).	Volume	3,	pp.	322-325.	
See	Chapter	12.
23)	
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear:	Aspirational	Prayer	[Calling]	to	the	Buddhas
and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	(
Sangs-rgyas	byang-sems-rnams	ra-mda’	sbran-
pa’i	smon-lam	’jigs-pa	rang-grol
).	Volume	3,	pp.	325-327.	
See	Chapter	12.
Path	of	Skilful	Means	(
thabs-lam
)
1)	
Natural	 Liberation	 through	 Desire:	 Most	 Profound	 Quintessence	 of

Guidance	on	Supreme	Bliss	Pertaining	to	the	Sexual	Practices
	(
’Og-sgo	bde-ba
chen-po’i	 khrid	 ’dod-chags	 rang-grol	 zhes-bya-ba	 yang-zab	 bcud-bsdus
).
Volume	3,	pp.	329-419.
2)	
The	Means	of	Establishing	the	Lineage	by	Carrying	Desire	onto	the	Path
and	the	Means	of	Closing	the	Womb	Entrances
	(
’Dod-chags	lam-khyer	rigs-
brgyud	bzhag-thabs-dang	mngal-sgo	’gag-thab	khol-du	phung-ba
).	Volume	3,
pp.	421-437.
3)	
Natural	Liberation	through	Supreme	Bliss:	A	Profound	Abridgement	of	the
Guidance	on	Supreme	Bliss	Attained	through	the	Sexual	Practices
	(
’Og-sgo	bde-
chen	’dod-chags	rang-grol-gyi	nyams-khrid	gud-sbas	don-bsdus	zab-khrid	bde-
ba	chen-po	rang-grol	zhes-bya-ba	shin-tu	zab-pa’i	nying-khu
),	composed	by
Nyinda	Ozer.	Volume	3,	pp.	439-481.
Protector	Rites	(
bstan-srung
)
1)	
Seven	Classes	of	Oath-bound	Protectors,	Associated	with	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Venomous	Hostile	Malevolent	Forces
and	Obstructors	through	Enlightened	Activity
	(
Zhi-khro	bka’-srung	dam-can
sde-bdun-gyi	
phrin-las	dgra-bgegs	gdug-pa	rang-grol
),	composed	by	Nyinda
Ozer.	Volume	3,	pp.	483-490.
2)	
Seven	Classes	of	Oath-bound	Protectors,	Associated	with	the	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	of	Venomous	Forces	through	Reparation
(
Zhi-khro	dam-can	sde-bdun-gyi	mdangs-bskang	gdug-pa	rang-grol
),	Volume	3,
pp.	491-498.
The	Lotus	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	(
Padma	zhi-khro
)
1)	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Rebirth:	 A	 Teaching	 Revealing	 the	 Natural
Expression	of	Virtue	and	Negativity,	through	the	Introduction	to	the	Intermediate
State	 of	 Rebirth
	 (
Srid-pa	 bar-do’i	 ngo-sprod	 dge-sdig	 rang-gzugs	 ston-pa’i
gdams-pa’am	me-long	srid-pa	rang-grol
),	contained	in	the	Delhi	offset	edition
of	the	
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the	Intermediate	States
,	pp.	499-533.	
See
Chapter	13,	Part	One.

Appendix	Two:	Symbolism	of	the	Maṇḍala	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
The	maṇḍala	represents	a	perfected	state	of	being,	and	the	central	deities	within
it	symbolise	the	perfected	states	of	the	meditator’s	own	awareness,	psycho-
physical	aggregates,	elemental	properties,	and	sensory	and	mental	processes.
The	peaceful	deities	represent	the	quiescent	natural	purity	of	these	fundamental
components	of	our	being	and	the	wrathful	deities	represent	the	transformative
aspects	of	these	energies,	which	bring	about	the	natural	transformation	of	the
most	enduring	and	deep-seated	expressions	of	our	mundane	perceptual	states.
Last,	the	outer	deities	of	the	maṇḍala	represent	the	modes	of	activity	of	an
enlightened	being.
The	exact	mapping	of	this	symbolism	does	vary	according	to	the	lineage	and
class	of	the	practice.	In	the	chart	presented	below,	the	correspondences	are	based
on	Chapter	5	of	the	present	work,	supplemented	by	correspondences	taken	from
other	texts	within	the	cycle,	with	certain	common	variances	noted.
The	Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities
The	male	and	female	primordial	buddhas:	Samantabadra	and
Samantabhadrῑ	in	union	represent	the	indivisible	union	of	pure	awareness
and	emptiness

The	five	female	buddhas:	Ākāśadhātvῑśvarῑ,	Buddhalocanā,	Māmakῑ,
Pāṇḍaravāsinῑ	and	Samayatārā,	represent	the	natural	purity	of	the	five
elements

The	eight	male	bodhisattvas:	Kṣitigarbha,	Maitreya,	Qamantabhadra,
Ākāśagarbha,	Avalokiteśvara,	Mañjuśrῑkumārabhūta,
Nivāraṇaviśkambhin	and	Vajrapāṇi,	represent	the	eight	classes	of
consciousness
N.B.	According	to	th	
Guhyagargha	Tantra
,	they	also	symbolise	the	four	senses
and	four	sense	organs.

The	eight	female	bodhisattvas:	Lāsyā,	Māmyā,	Dhūpā,	Gῑtā,	Ālokā,	Gandhā
and	Nartῑ,	represent	the	four	sense	objects	and	the	four	phases	of
conceptual	thought	(past,	present,	future	and	indeterminate),	or
alternatively	the	eight	objects	of	consciousness

The	four	male	gatekeepers:	Trailokyavijaya,	Yamāntaka,	Hayagrῑva	and
Amṛtakuṇḍalin,	represent	the	natural	purity	of	the	four	extreme	views	and
four	aspects	of	enlightened	activity

The	four	female	gatekeepers:	Aṅkuśā,	Pāśā,	Sphoṭā	and	Ghaṇṭā,	represent	the
natural	purity	of	the	four	types	of	birth	and	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations

The	Fifty-eight	Wrathful	Deities
The	six	peaceful	male	buddhas:	Samantabhadra,	Vairocana,	Aksobhya-
Vajrasattva,	Rtnasambhava,	Amitabha	and	Amoghasiddhi	are	in	their	wrathful
aspects	respectively:	Mahottara	Heruka,	Buddha	Heruka,	Vajra	Heruka,	Ratna
Heruka,	Padma	Heruka	and	Karma	Heruka,	who	represent	the	natural
transformation	of	the	six	dissonant	mental	states.

The	six	peaceful	female	budhas:	Samantabhadrῑ,	Ᾱkāśadhātvῑśvarῑ,
Buddhalocanā,	Māmakῑ,	Pāndaravāsinῑ	and	Samayatārā	in	their	wrathful	aspects
respectively	are	Krodheśvarῑ,	Buddhakrodheśvarῑ,	Vajrakrodheśvarῑ,
Ratnakrodheśvarῑ,	Padmakrodheśvarῑ	and	Karmakrodheśvarῑ,	who	represent	the
natural	transformation	of	mental	constructs	associated	with	the	six	objects	of
consciousness

The	eight	Mātarah:	Gaurῑ,	Caurῑ,	Pratāmohā,	Vetālῑ,	Ghasmarῑ,	Candālῑ	and
Śmaśānῑ,	represent	the	natural	transformation	of	mental	constructs	associated
with	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness

The	eight	Piśācῑ:	Simhamukhῑ,	Vyāghrῑmukhῑ,	Śṛgālamukhῑ,	Kaṅkamukhῑ,
Kākamukhῑ	and	Ulūkamukhῑ,	represent	the	natural	transformation	of	mental
constructs	associated	with	the	objects	of	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness

The	four	Female	Gatekeepers	manifest	as	Vajratejasῑ,	Vajrāmoghā,	Vajralokā	and
Vajravetālῑ,	respectively	representing	the	closing	of	the	doors	to	the	four	types	of
birth	and	the	four	immeasurable	aspirations

Twenty-eight	Iśvarῑ,	represent	the	purification	of	the	aggregates	of	bewildered
mental	constructs	and	the	enactment	of	enlightened	activity

Notes
List	of	Abbreviations
Derge	 Derge	 Parkhang	 xylographic	 editions,	 of	 the	
Kangyur
,	
Tengyur
	 and
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
	(NGB).
Disc.	
gTer-ston
,	discoverer	of	concealed	teachings	(
gter	ma
).
DR	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
,	3	vols.	The	most	extensive	and
accurate	 version	 of	 Karma	 Lingpa’s	 revelations	 (64	 texts,	 764	 folios),	 a
manuscript	 of	 Katok	 provenance,	 from	 the	 library	 of	 the	 previous	 Dudjom
Rinpoche,	 published	 in	 photo-offset	 form	 (Delhi:	 Sherab	 Lama,	 1975-76),
reproduced	on	CD-ROM	by	TBRC,	New	York,	Ref:	2330-2332.
GGFTC	G.	Dorje,	
The	Guhyagarbhatattvaviniścayamahātantra	and	its	XIVth
Century	Tibetan	Commentary	Phyogs	bcu	mun	sel.
	3	vols.	Unpublished	Ph.D.
thesis,	 University	 of	 London,	 1987.	 See	 also	
The	 Guhyagarbha	 Tantra:
Dispelling	the	Darkness	of	the	Ten	Directions
	(forthcoming).
MTTWL	 P.	 Pfandt,	
Mahāyāna	 Texts	 Translated	 into	 Western	 Languages
.
Cologne:	In	Komission	bei	E.	J.	Brill,	1983.
NA	Not	available,	not	extant.
NGB	The	Derge	xylographic	edition	of	the	
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
(
rNying-ma’i	rgyud-’bum
)	in	26	vols.
NK	
Collected	Teachings	of	the	Nyingmapa
	(
rNying-ma’i	bka’-ma
),	compiled	in
120	vols.	by	Khenpo	Jamyang,	Katok	(1999).
NSTB	 Dudjom	 Rinpoche,	
The	 Nyingma	 School	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism:	 Its
Fundamentals	and	History
,	translated	by	G.	Dorje	and	M.	Kapstein,	Boston:
Wisdom	Publications,	1991.	This	volume	contains	two	texts,	
Gangs-ljongs	rgya-
bstan	yongs-rdzogs-kyi	phyi-mo	snga-’gyur	rdo-rje	theg-pa’i	bstan-pa	rin-po-
che	 ji-ltar	 byung-ba’i	 tshul-dag-cing	 gsal-bar	 brjod-pa	 lha-dbang	 gYul-las
rgyal-ba’i	 rngabo-che’i	 sgra-dbyangs
	 (short	 title:	
rNying-ma’i	chos-’byung
),
and	the	
gSang-sngags	snga-’gyur	rnying-ma-ba’i	bstan-pa’i	rnam-gzhag	mdo-
tsam	brjod-pa	legs-bshad	snang-ba’i	dga’-ston
	(short	title:	
bsTan-pa’i	rnam-
gzhag
).
Redisc.	Rediscoverer	of	twice-concealed	teachings	(
yang-gter
).
SDGG	Lochen	Dharmaśr
ῑ
,	
gSang-bdag	dgongs-rgyan
,	NK,	Vol.	76.
T	
A	Complete	Catalogue	of	the	Tibetan	Buddhist	Canons
,	ed.	H.	Ui	
et	al
.,

Sendai:	Tohoku	University,	1934.	This	is	a	catalogue	to	the	Derge	xylographic
edition	of	the	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur
.
TBD	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	(
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
).
TBD	Amdo	edition	
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
,	303	pages,	recently	compiled	by
Khenpo	Dorje	and	published	in	Hong	Kong,	in	Qinghai	Buddhist	Texts	Series,
Vol.	I	(n.d.).
TBD	 Delhi	 reprint	
Bar-do	 thos-grol	 chen-mo
,	 550	 pages,	 Delhi	 (1985).
Reproduced	from	a	print	of	the	Bhutanese	Rinpung	Dzong	xylograph	through
the	agency	of	HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche.
TBD	 Varanasi	 reprint	
Bar-do	 thos-grol	 chen-mo
,	 122	 pages,	 ed.	 Kalsang
Lhundup,	Varanasi	(1969).	Handwritten	print	based	on	the	xylographic	edition	of
HH	Dilgo	Khyentse	Rinpoche,	housed	at	Engon	Monastery	in	Sikkim.
1	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Nature	of	Mind
1
	
Tib.	
gSang-sngags	rdo-rje	theg-pa’i	chos-spyod	thun-bzhi’i	rnal-’byor	sems-
nyid	rang-grol
.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
The	practices	concerning	death	(
’chi-ba
)	are	the	analytical	meditations	on	the
nature	of	impermanence	(
anitya
).	See	
e.g.
	Paltrul	Rinpoche,	
The	Words	of	My
Perfect	Teacher
,	pp.	39-59;	Sonam	T.	Kazi	(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-may	Zhal-lung
,
pp.	56-82;	and	
Sgam.po.pa/H
.	V.	Guenther	(trans.),	
The	Jewel	Ornament	of
Liberation
,	pp.	41-54.	The	expression	‘starting	with’	(
sogs-la
)	implies	that	this
will	lead	on	to	the	other	analytical	meditations	concerning	past	actions	(
karma
)
and	the	sufferings	of	cyclic	existence	(
saṃsāra
).	On	the	application	of	the
meditation	on	death	by	hermit	buddhas	who	frequent	charnel	grounds	in	order	to
meditate	in	reverse	on	the	twelve	links	of	dependent	origination
(
prat
ῑ
tyasamutpāda
),	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	228-9.
4
	
This	description	of	phenomena	accords	with	the	account	given	by	Nāgārjuna	at
the	beginning	of	his	
Root	Stanzas	of	the	Madhyamaka	entitled	Discriminative
Awareness
	(
Prajñā-nāma-mūlamadhyamakakārikā
).	See	the	translation	by	D.
Kalupahana,	
Mūlamadhyamakakārikās
,	Ch.1.
5
	
i.e.
	lacking	in	skilful	means,	on	which	see	glossary.
6
	
For	a	description	of	the	eight	freedoms	(
dal-ba	brgyad
)	and	the	ten

opportunities	(
’byor-ba	bcu
),	see	glossary.
7
	
On	the	dissolution	of	the	physical	environment	(
lokadhātu
)	by	fire	and	water	at
the	end	of	an	aeon,	see	L.	Pruden	(trans.),	
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ
,	Ch.	3,	The
World,	pp.	475-7,	489-95.
8
	
The	‘Lord	of	Death’	(
’chi-bdag
)	is	an	epithet	of	Yama	Dharmarāja.	See
glossary.
9
	
The	expression	‘irreversible	path’	(
phyir	mi-zlog-pa’i	lam
)	refers	to	the	sūtras
of	the	second	and	third	turnings	of	the	wheel	of	the	sacred	teachings,	which
expound	the	definitive	meaning.	See	glossary	under	definitive	meaning.
10
	
Lit.	‘accumulations’	(Tib.	
tshogs
).	This	refers	to	the	accumulation	of	merit
(
bsod-nams
),	as	opposed	to	the	accumulation	of	pristine	cognition	(
ye-shes
).	See
glossary.
11
	
Tib.	
mnyam-rdzogs	klong-yangs	chen-po’i	rang-bzhin
.	This	expanse	of
sameness	and	perfection	is	synonymous	with	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.	See
Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	251-2.
12
	
Name	and	form	(
nāmarūpa
)	together	comprise	all	the	five	psycho-physical
aggregates	(
pañcaskandha
)	of	which	the	mind-body	complex	is	formed,	
viz.
form	(
rūpa
),	consciousness	(
vijñāna
),	feeling	(
vedanā
),	perception	(
saṃjñā
),	and
motivational	tendencies	(
saṃskāra
).	See	glossary	under	aggregates.
13
	
The	seed-syllable	HŪṂ	is	that	of	Vajrasattva,	symbolising	buddha-mind.	On
its	composition,	see	Paltrul	Rinpoche,	
The	Words	of	My	Perfect	Teacher
,	p.	272.
14
	
For	an	illustration	depicting	the	crown	fontanelle	in	its	relation	with	the	three
main	energy	channels	and	ancillary	vessels,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	p.
34.
15
	
See	glossary	under	Hundred-syllable	Mantra.
16
	
‘Vajra	Holder’	(
vajradhṛk
;	Tib.	
rdo-rje	’dzin-pa
),	here	referring	to	the	deity
Vajrasattva,	is	a	title	generally	given	to	accomplished	exponents	of	the	Vehicle
of	Indestructible	Reality	(
Vajrayāna
).
17
	
This	prayer	for	total	union	with	the	deity	is	repeated	below,	p.	21,	at	the	end
of	the	section	on	union	with	the	spiritual	teacher	(
guruyoga
).	As	to	the	specified
indications	of	this	union,	the	body	size	(
kāya
;	Tib.	
sku’i	tshad
)	and	lifespan	of
Vajrasattva	(
āyuḥ
;	Tib.	
tshe
)	are	those	of	a	buddha,	on	which	see	P.	Williams,

Mahāyāna	Buddhism
,	pp.	181-4;	his	retinue	(
parivāra
;	Tib.	
’khor
)	comprises
male	and	female	bodhisattvas,	on	which	see	Ch.	5,	p.	68;	and	his	field	(
kṣetra
;
Tib.	
zhing-khams
)	is	Abhirati	on	which	see	Ch.	11,	p.	239.	For	the	significance
of	the	thirty-two	major	marks	(
dvātriṃśasanmukhāpuruṣalakṣaṇa
;	Tib.	
skyes-bu
dam-pa’i	mtshan-bzang	sum-cu	rtsa-gnyis
),	which	are	displayed	on	the	buddha-
body	of	form	(
rūpakāya
),	see	glossary.
18
	
The	initial	mantra	of	the	external	mandala	of	offerings:	OṂ	VAJRA	BHŪMI
ĀḤ	HŪṂ	indicates	that	the	foundation	or	base	of	the	symbolic	mandala	is	of	the
nature	of	indestructible	reality	(
vajra
;	Tib.	
rdo-rje
).	Simultaneously,	the
practitioner	sprinkles	consecrated	substances	upon	it.	See	Paltrul	Rinpoche,	
The
Words	of	My	Perfect	Teacher
,	p.	287;	and	Sonam	T.	Kazi	(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-
may	Zhal-lung
,	p.	400.
19
	
The	foundation	of	the	maṇḍala	is	considered	to	be	an	immensely	thick
indestructible	circle	of	wind,	resting	upon	space,	and	surmounted	by	a	circle	of
water	and	a	sphere	of	gold.	See	L.	Pruden	(trans.),	
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ
,
Ch.	3,	The	World,	pp.	451-2.
20
	
The	second	mantra	of	the	mandala	of	offerings:	OṂ	VAJRA	REKHE	ĀḤ
HŪṂ	indicates	that	the	
cakravāḍa
	or	‘perimeter	wall’	of	the	maṇḍala	is	of	the
nature	of	indestructible	reality.	Simultaneously,	the	practitioner	makes	a
clockwise	circular	motion	with	the	right	hand,	and	places	a	flower	blossom	on
the	surface	of	the	maṇḍala,	followed	by	the	outer	ring.	See	Paltrul	Rinpoche,	
The
Words	of	My	Perfect	Teacher
,	p.	287;	and	Sonam	T.	Kazi	(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-
may	Zhal-lung
,	pp.	400-401.
21
	
On	the	perception	of	the	sun	(
sūrya
;	Tib.	
nyi-ma
)	and	moon	(
candra
;	Tib.	
zla-
ba
)	from	the	perspective	of	Abhidharma,	see	L.	Pruden	(trans.),
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ
	
,	pp.	460-62;	and	R.	Kloetzli,	
Buddhist	Cosmology
,
pp.	45-6.	Rāhu	(
sgra-gcan
)	and	Ketu	(
dus-me
)	are	identified	as	the	ascending
and	descending	phases	of	the	moon.
22
	
The	syllables	OṂ	ĀṂ	HŪṂ	respectively	symbolise	buddha-body,	speech
and	mind,	for	which	reason,	in	the	context	of	the	present	work,	they	frequently
appear	at	the	beginning	of	verses	as	an	invocation.	See	Ch.	5,	pp.	67ff.	The	three
verses	which	follow	respectively	concern	the	outer,	inner,	and	secret	
maṇḍala	of
offerings	which	are	made	respectively	to	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation
(
nirmāṇakāya
),	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	(
sambhogakāya
	
),	and	the
Buddha-body	of	Reality	(
dharmakāya
).	On	the	construction	of	these	three

maṇḍalas,	see	Paltrul	Rinpoche,	
The	Words	of	My	Perfect	Teacher
,	pp.	288-95;
and	Sonam	T.	Kazi	(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-may	Zhal-lung
	
,	Pt.	2,	pp.	403-4.
23
	
The	ultimate	nature	of	mind	(
sems-nyid
)	is	identified	with	the	Buddha-body
of	Reality	(
dharmakāya
).	For	a	detailed	introduction	to	the	nature	of	mind,
within	the	context	of	the	present	work,	see	Ch.	4,	pp.	38-57.
24
	
The	concluding	mantra	of	the	mandala	of	offerings	OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	MAHĀ
GURU	DEVA	DĀKINĪ	RATNA	MAṆḌALA	PŪJĀ	MEGHA	Ā	HŪṂ	indicates
that	a	cloud	of	offerings	is	presented	to	the	precious	maṇḍala	of	the	spiritual
teachers,	meditational	deities,	and	dākin
ῑ
s.
25
	
The	spiritual	teachers	of	the	core	lineage	who	are	connected	with	this
transmission	(
’brel-tshad	don-ldan	rtsa-brgyud	bla-ma-rnams
)	are	those	in
successive	generations	who	have	maintained	the	lineage	of	our	text	from	the
time	of	Nyinda	Ozer	down	to	the	present.	See	‘A	Brief	Literary	History’,	pp.
xxxvi-xlviii.
26
	
The	biographies	of	the	important	figures	in	the	lineage	of	the	oral
transmission	(
bka’-brgyud
)	related	to	the	teachings	of	the	Nyingma	school,	are
outlined	in	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	601-739.
27
	
The	strict	vows	made	in	the	past	(
sngon-gyi	dam-bca’	gnyan-po
)	are	those
taken	by	buddhas	and	bodhisattvas	in	former	lives	pertaining	to	the	propagation
of	the	Buddhist	teaching	and	the	bodhisattva	vow	to	remove	the	sufferings	of	all
beings.	See	
e.g.
	P.	Williams,	
Mahāyāna	Buddhism
,	pp.	49-54.
28
	
Listed	among	the	eighty	minor	marks	(
as
ῑ
tyanuvyañjana
),	the	Brahmā-like
voice	(
tshangs-pa’i	gsung
)	refers	to	one	of	the	six	modes	of	buddha-speech.	See
Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	703-4.
29
	
On	the	concept	of	cyclical	time,	see	L.	Pruden	(trans.),
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ
	
,	Ch.	3,	The	World,	pp.	475-95;	R.	Kloetzli,	
Buddhist
Cosmology
,	pp.	73-5.	Each	great	aeon	(
mahākalpa
)	of	cyclical	time	is	said	to
comprise	the	four	eras	of	creation	(
vivartakalpa
),	duration	(
vivartasthāyikalpa
),
dissolution	(
saṃvartakalpa
),	and	non-duration	(
saṃvartasthāyikalpa
).	The
expression	‘final	era’	(
dus-mtha’
)	refers	to	the	period	of	dissolution.
30
	
On	this	conferral	of	the	four	empowerments,	namely:	the	vase	empowerment
(
bum-dbang
),	the	secret	empowerment	(
gsang-dbang
),	the	empowerment	of
pristine	cognition	(
shes-rab	ye-shes-kyi	dbang
)	and	the	fourth	empowerment	of
indivisible	coemergence	(
dbyer-med	lhan-skyes	dbang	bzhi-pa
)	which

respectively	confer	the	accomplishment	of	buddha-body	(
sku-yi	dngos-grub
),	the
accomplishment	of	buddha-speech	(
gsung-gi	dngos-grub
),	the	accomplishment
of	buddha-mind	(
thugs-kyi	dngos-grub
),	and	the	combined	accomplishment	of
buddha-body,	speech	and	mind	(
sku-gsung-thugs-kyi	dngos-grub
),	see	Paltrul
Rinpoche,	
The	Words	of	My	Perfect	Teacher
,	pp.	329-30;	and	Sonam	T.	Kazi
(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-may	Zhal-lung
,	Pt.	2,	pp.	462-5.
2	A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher
1
	
Tib.	
sKu-gsum	bla-ma’i	rnal-’byor	gsol-’debs	dug-gsum	ma-spang	rang-grol
.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol.
3
	
The	specific	blessing	which	arises	from	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality	(
chos-
sku’i	byin-rlab
)	is	‘primordially	pure’	(
ka-dag
),	indicating	that	in	this	context	the
Buddha-body	of	Reality	is	directly	realised	through	the	Atiyoga	practice	called
‘Cutting	through	Resistance	to	primordial	purity’	(
ka-dag	khregs-chod
),	on
which	see	Ch.	4;	also	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	335-7.
4
	
This	blessing	is	‘spontaneously	present’	(
lhun-grub
),	indicating	that	the
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	is	directly	realised	through	the	Atiyoga
practice	called	‘All-surpassing	Realisation	of	spontaneous	presence’	(
lhun-grub
thod-rgal
).	See	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	337-45.
5
	
The	pristine	cognition	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource,	here	referred
to	as	‘naturally	liberated	in	supreme	bliss’	(
bde-chen	rang-grol
),	comprises	the
mirror-like	pristine	cognition	(
ādarśajñāna
),	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness
(
samatājñāna
),	and	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment	(
pratyavekṣanajñāna
	
).
See	glossary	under	pristine	cognition.
6
	
The	pristine	cognition	referred	to	here	is	the	pristine	cognition	of	the	Buddha-
body	of	Emanation,	otherwise	known	as	the	pristine	cognition	of
accomplishment	(
kṛtyupasthānajñāna
).	See	glossary	under	pristine	cognition.
7
	
The	natural	pristine	cognition	(
rang-byung	ye-shes
)	of	the	three	buddha-bodies
in	union	refers	to	the	unity	of	all	the	five	aspects	of	pristine	cognition
(
pañcajñāna
	
).
8
	
On	the	bodhisattva’s	altruistic	aspiration	not	to	enter	nirvāṇa	until	all	sentient
beings	have	been	liberated	from	cyclic	existence	(
saṃsāra
),	see	P.	Williams,

Mahāyāna	Buddhism
,	pp.	49-54.
3	Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
1
	
Tib.	
Bar-do	rnam-drug-gi	rtsa-tshig
.	These	verses	are	reiterated	in	the	context
of	other	chapters	of	this	cycle,	
e.g.
	Ch.	10,	p.	205,	and	Ch.	11,	pp.	235	and	288.
2
	
Chs.	1-7	of	the	present	text	relate	to	the	intermediate	state	of	living,	including
the	intermediate	states	of	dreaming	and	meditative	concentration.
3
	
Chs.	8-10	of	the	present	text	relate	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of
death.
4
	
The	intermediate	state	of	reality	is	the	subject	of	Ch.	11.
5
	
The	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	is	the	subject	of	Chs.	11	and	13.
4	Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
1
	
Tib.	
Rig-pa	ngo-sprod	gcer-mthong	rang-grol
.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
The	point	is	that	all	the	inestimable	84,000	aspects	of	the	sacred	teachings,	the
nine	vehicles,	the	three	or	four	
piṭaka
,	and	so	forth,	depend	upon	the	
primary
understanding	of	intrinsic	awareness.	Cf.	
Laṅkāvatārasūtra
,	Ch.	2,	v.	202:	‘As
long	as	sentient	beings	manifest,	there	will	be	no	end	to	the	vehicles.	When	the
mind	becomes	transformed,	there	is	neither	vehicle	nor	mover.’
4
	
The	Tibetan	expression	
tshig	gsum
	(lit.	‘three	words’)	is	used	colloquially	to
mean	‘terse’	or	‘in	few	words’.	Two	alternative	readings	have	been	suggested:	1)
The	phrase	‘three	words’	could	refer	to	the	three	statements	given	on	pp.	4	1-2,
that	‘past	thoughts	are	traceless,	clear	and	empty’,	that	‘future	thoughts	are
unproduced	and	fresh’,	and	that	‘the	present	moment	abides	naturally	and
unconstructed’.	2)	A	less	likely	view	is	that	this	expression	may	refer	to	the
Atiyoga	testament	of	Prahevajra	(Tib.	dGa’-rab	rdo-rje),	entitled	
Three	Points
which	Penetrate	the	Essential
	(
tshig-gsum	gnad-du	brdeg-pa
).	The	three	points
contained	in	this	latter	work	crystalise	the	process	through	which	intrinsic
awareness	(
rang-rig
)	is	introduced.	They	are	as	follows:	the	‘direct	introduction

to	the	essence	itself’	(
ngo-rang	thog-tu	’phrod-pa
),	the	‘direct	determination	of
this	unique	state’	(
thag-gcig	thog-tu	bcad-pa
),	and	the	‘direct	confidence	in
liberation’	(
gdeng-grol	thog-tu	bca’-ba
).	For	the	original	text,	see	
Bi-ma	sNying-
thig
,	Pt.	1,	Vol.	Ga,	pp.	304-18,	and	Patrul	Rinpoche’s	nineteenth-century
commentary	entitled	
mKhas-pa’i	shri	rgyal-po	mkhas-chos
.	The	background	to
the	revelation	of	Prahevajra’s	testament	is	given	in	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,
pp.	490-94.
5
	
This	verse	derives	from	the	
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
,	Ch.	13,	v.	2:	There	are	those
of	no	understanding,/	And	those	of	wrong	understanding,/	Those	of	partial
understanding,/	And	those	who	have	not	[quite]	understood	genuine	reality.
As	 explained	 by	 Longchen	 Rabjampa,	 GGFTC,	 pp.	 988-97,	 those	 of	 no
understanding	(
ma-rtogs-pa
)	are	ordinary	persons	who	adhere	to	the	‘vehicles	of
gods	 and	 humans’	 (
devamanuṣyayāna
),	 striving	 after	 excellence	 and	 higher
rebirths	within	cyclic	existence	(
saṃsāra
)	through	the	practice	of	virtue.	Those
of	 misunderstanding	 (
log-rtogs-pa
)	 comprise	 the	 eternalistic	 and	 nihilistic
extremist	philosophers	of	ancient	India,	who	adhere	to	the	Nyayāyika,	Vaiṣṇava,
Sāṃkhyā,	 Vaiśeṣika,	 and	 Bārhaspatya	 standpoints.	 Those	 of	 partial
understanding	(
phyogs-tsam	rtogs-pa
)	comprise	the	pious	attendants	(
śrāvaka
)
who	realise	the	selflessness	of	the	individual	person	(
pudgalanairātmya
)	but	fail
to	realise	the	selflessness	of	phenomena	(
dharmanairātmya
),	and	the	hermit
buddhas	 (
pratyekabuddha
)	 who	 additionally	 realise	 the	 lack	 of	 inherent
existence	(
niḥsvabhāvatā
)	with	respect	to	external	material	phenomena,	but	fail
to	realise	the	lack	of	inherent	existence	in	internal	mental	phenomena.	Lastly,
those	who	do	not	quite	understand	genuine	reality	(
yang-dag	ji-bzhin-nyid-du
ma-rtogs-pa
)	comprise	the	adherents	of	the	causal	vehicles,	who	maintain	the
views	of	Cittamātra	and	Madhyamaka,	realising	respectively	that	phenomena	are
extensions	 of	 consciousness	 and	 that	 all	 phenomena,	 whether	 external	 or
internal,	are	without	inherent	existence;	yet	not	quite	understanding	that	‘all
things	are	identical	in	primordial	buddhahood’,	or	that	‘neither	renunciation	nor
acceptance	 is	 required	 because	 dissonant	 mental	 states	 themselves	 arise	 as
pristine	cognition’.	At	the	same	time,	all	these	types	are	said	to	be	‘meagre	in
their	skilful	means	(
upāyakauśalya
)’	and	they	‘accomplish	their	results	with
difficulty	and	toil	over	a	long	period	of	time’.	Longchen	Rabjampa	concludes
that	only	the	adherents	of	the	resultant	vehicles	(
phalayāna
)	perceive	genuine
reality	as	it	is,	and	among	these,	only	Atiyoga	is	stated	to	be	the	‘naturally	secret
truth’	(
rang-bzhin	 gsang-ba’i	 don
),	 while	 Kriyātantra	 and	 Ubhayatantra	
are
referred	 to	 as	 ‘disciplines’	 (
’dul-ba
),	 Yogatantra	 as	 ‘enlightened	 intention’

(
dgongs-pa
),	 and	 Mahāyoga	 as	 ‘secrecy’	 (
gsang-ba
).	 These	 diverse
classifications	of	Buddhist	practitioners	and	vehicles	are	identified,	one	by	one,
in	the	following	verses.	For	the	Nyingma	perspective	of	the	non-Buddhist	views
‘of	wrong	understanding’	(
log-rtogs-pa
)	mentioned	above,	see	also	Dudjom
Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	64-7.
6
	
On	the	classifications	of	those	ordinary	persons	‘of	no	understanding’	
(ma-
rtogs-pa)
	
who	adhere	to	the	‘vehicles	of	gods	and	humans’	(
devamanuṣyayāna
),
see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	57-64.
7
	
The	‘partial	absence	of	self’	(
phyogs-tsam	bdag-med
)	is	that	aspect	of
selflessness	comprehended	by	pious	attendants	and	hermit	buddhas.	See	glossary
under	selflessness.
8
	
This	passage,	in	which	the	texts	(
gzhung
)	and	philosophical	systems
(
siddhānta
;	Tib.	
grub-mtha’
)	of	the	diverse	Buddhist	schools	are	said	to	inhibit
the	perception	of	inner	radiance,	corresponds	closely	to	a	well-known	quotation
from	the	
Tantra	of	the	All-accomplishing	King
	(
Kun-byed	rgyal-po’i	rgyud
,	T
828),	for	a	translation	of	which,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	295-7.	The
Buddhist	and	non-Buddhist	spiritual	and	philosophical	systems	(
siddhānta
)	are
the	subject	of	detailed	analysis	in	many	specialist	treatises,	among	which	the
Nyingma	presentations	relevant	to	our	present	text	include	Longchen
Rabjampa’s	
Treasury	of	Spiritual	and	Philosophical	Systems
	(
Grub-mtha’
mdzod
),	and	Dudjom	Rinpoche’s	
Fundamentals	of	the	Nyingma	School
	
(
bsTan-
pa’i	rnam-gzhag
).
9
	
According	to	the	often-cited	passage	from	the	
Tantra	of	the	All-accomplishing
King
	(
Kun-byed	rgyal-po’i	rgyud
,	T	828)	mentioned	above,	the	weaknesses	(
gol-
sa
)	of	these	three	outer	classes	of	tantra	are	respectively:	maintaining	the
subject-object	dichotomy	in	relation	to	purity	(Kriyātantra),	maintaining	the
duality	of	view	and	conduct	(Ubhayatantra),	and	maintaining	acceptance	and
rejection	in	relation	to	meditation	(Yogatantra).	In	the	present	context,	these	are
all	subsumed	in	the	weakness	of	excessive	attachment	to	the	so-called	‘four
branches	of	ritual	service	and	attainment’	(
bsnyen-sgrub	yan-lag	bzhi
),	on	which
see	the	glossary.
10
	
The	inner	tantras	of	skilful	means	(
nang-pa	thabs-kyi	rgyud
),	which	are	the
subject	of	the	present	verse,	are	those	of	Mahāyoga,	Anuyoga,	and	Atiyoga,	for	a
detailed	discussion	of	which,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	273-345,	357-
72.	Of	these	inner	tantras	of	skilful	means,	only	Atiyoga	is	considered	to	be	free

from	weaknesses,	while	the	
Tantra	of	the	All-accomplishing	King
	
(
Kun-byed
rgyal-po’i	rgyud
)	refers	to	the	weakness	in	Mahāyoga	as	‘excessive	perseverance
with	regard	to	ritual	service	and	attainment’	(
sevāsādhana
);	and	to	the	weakness
in	Anuyoga	as	‘the	duality	of	pure	expanse	or	space’	(
dag-pa’i	dbyings
)
identified	with	Samantabhadr
ῑ
,	and	of	pristine	cognition	or	awareness	(
jñāna
),
which	is	identified	with	Samantabhadra.	See	NSTB,	pp.	295-7.	In	the	context	of
the	present	verse,	these	weaknesses	are	both	subsumed	in	the	dualistic	notion	of
‘space	and	awareness’	(
dbyings-rig
).
11
	
Our	text	at	this	point	has	the	reading:	
gdams-ngag	gdams-ngag
	(‘oral
teaching,	oral	teaching’).	The	meaningful	reading:	
gang-zag	bdag-med
(‘selflessness	of	the	individual’)	is	suggested	by	Zenkar	Rinpoche.
12
	
The	elimination	of	the	dichotomy	between	‘singularity’	(
gcig
)	and
‘multiplicity’	(
du-ma
)	is	the	subject	of	one	of	the	great	axioms	of	Madhyamaka
dialectic,	
known	as	the	‘absence	of	the	singular	and	the	multiple’	(
gcig-dang	du-
bral
),	on	which	see	M.	D.	Eckel,	
Jñānagarbha’s	Commentary	on	the	Distinction
between	the	Two	Truths
,	pp.	80-85.
13
	
The	innate	presence	of	intrinsic	awareness,	without	need	for	the	elaborations
of	view	(
lta-ba
),	meditation	(
sgom-pa
),	conduct	(
spyod-pa
),	or	result	(
’bras-bu
	
),
as	expounded	in	these	verses,	is	clearly	discussed	in	the	Atiyoga	texts	of	Cutting
through	Resistance	(
khregs-chod
).	See	
e.g.
	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	p.	335.
14
	
The	adopting	of	these	four	media	(
thig-bzhi
)	is	comparable	to	reaching	the
limits	of	awareness	by	the	three	presences	(
sdod-pa	gsum
),	or	the	revealing	of
the	limits	of	liberation	by	means	of	the	four	assurances	(
gdeng-bzhi
),	which
consolidate	the	practices	of	the	Great	Perfection.	On	these	Atiyoga	terms,	see
Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	p.	343.
15
	
The	riveting	of	these	four	nails	(
gzer-bzhi
)	is	comparable	to	that	of	the	three
attainments	(
thob-pa	gsum
),	which	consolidate	the	practices	of	the	Great
Perfection.	See	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	p.	343.
16
	
The	two	extremes	of	which	the	view	is	free	are	open	and	closed	or	high	and
low	perspectives;	the	two	extremes	of	which	meditation	is	devoid	are	hope	and
doubt;	the	two	extremes	of	which	conduct	is	free	are	renunciation	and
acceptance;	and	the	two	extremes	of	which	the	result	is	free	are	beginning	and
end.	These	eight	extremes	may	be	reduced	to	six	by	omitting	the	category	of	the
result.

17
	
On	the	view	of	vacuous	emptiness	(
stong-pa	phyal-ba
)	maintained	by	non-
Buddhists,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	62-4,	66-7;	and	for	a	detailed
discussion,	the	purpose	of	which	is	to	indicate	that	the	Buddhist	view	of
emptiness	is	neither	vacuous	nor	nihilistic,	see	ibid.,	pp.	178-216.
18
	
The	nature	of	the	delusion	(
gti-mug
),	drowsiness	(
’thib-pa
),	and	agitation
(
rgod-pa
),	which	obstruct	the	clarity	of	meditations	such	as	calm	abiding
(
śamatha
),	is	discussed	in	L.	Pruden	(trans.),	
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ
,	Ch.	5,
The	Latent	Defilements,	pp.	767-868,	and	Ch.	8,	The	Absorptions,	pp.	1215-82.
19
	
Existence	and	non-existence	(
yod-med	gang-du	ma-grub
)	form	one	binary
subset	within	the	four-point	set	(
catuṣkoṭi
)	of	propositions	which	are	negated	by
Nāgārjuna	in	the	
Root	Stanzas	of	the	Madhyamaka	entitled	Discriminative
Awareness
	(
Prajñā-nāma	mūlamadhyamakakārikā
,	T	3824).	See	D.	Kalupahana
(trans.),	
Mūlamadhyamakakārikās
.
20
	
On	the	controversy	concerning	the	emptiness	which	is	devoid	of	virtuous	and
negative	actions	(
stong-pa-nyid-la	dge-sdig	yul-ma	grub
),	see	the	discussion	on
the	view	of	the	Great	Perfection	in	NSTB,	pp.	896-910.
21
	
The	lives	of	the	future	treasure-finders	(
gter-ston
)	predicted	by
Padmasambhava,	including	that	of	Karma	Lingpa,	the	treasure-finder	associated
with	our	present	text,	are	recounted	in	NSTB,	pp.	750-880,	and	on	the
prophecies	found	in	the	treasure-doctrines,	ibid.,	pp.	934-5.	On	Karma	Lingpa,
see	also	‘A	Brief	Literary	History’,	pp.	xxxvi-xlviii.
5	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
1
	
Tib.	
Chos-spyod	bag-chags	rang-grol.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol.
3
	
Samantabhadra	(
kun-tu	bzang-po
)	and	Mahottara	(
che-mchog
)	respectively
represent	the	peaceful	and	wrathful	aspects	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality
(
dharmakāya
).
4
	
The	first	of	these	mantras:	OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	BODHICITTA
MAHĀSUKHAJÑĀNA	DHĀTU	ĀḤ	is	the	unified	enlightened	intention	of	the
forty-two	peaceful	deities.	See	below,	Ch.	14,	p.	354.	The	second	mantra:	OṂ
RULU	RULU	HŪṂ	BHYOḤ	HŪṂ	is	the	unified	enlightened	intention	of	the

fifty-eight	wrathful	deities.	See	Ch.	14,	p.	364.
5
	
Whereas	the	description	of	Vajrasattva	given	above,	Ch.	1,	pp.	15-16,	focuses
on	the	purificatory	function	of	Vajrasattva,	the	present	passage	provides	the
formal	description	(
abhisamaya
;	Tib.	
mngon-rtogs
)	for	the	visualisation	of
Vajrasattva,	according	to	the	generation	stage	(
utpattikrama
)	of	meditation.
6
	
For	an	explanation,	see	glossary	under	Hundred-syllable	Mantra.
7
	
These	comprise	the	ten	male	and	female	buddhas	along	with	the	sixteen	male
and	female	bodhisattvas.	See	Appendix	Two.
8
	
An	inserted	annotation	in	the	text	adds	that	if	this	aspirational	prayer	is	recited
on	behalf	of	a	deceased	person,	the	word	‘we’	should,	on	each	occurrence,	be
replaced	with	‘the	deceased’.
9
	
The	level	of	Samantabhadra	is	the	sixteenth	buddha	level,	otherwise	known	as
the	Level	of	Unsurpassed	Pristine	Cognition	(
ye-shes	bla-ma
).
10
	
This	and	the	following	italicized	verses	are	extracted	from	the	
Aspirational
Prayer	which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous	Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States.
See	Ch.	12,	pp.	310-13.
11
	
The	four	pristine	cognitions	combined	are	the	first	four	of	the	five	pristine
cognitions,	omitting	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment.	See	glossary.	On
the	reason	for	the	omission	of	the	pristine	cognition	of	accomplishment,	see	Ch.
11,	p.	249.
12
	
The	occipital	channel,	which	resembles	the	horn	of	an	ox,	is	adjacent	to	the
energy	centre	of	perfect	resource	at	the	throat	(
mgrin-pa	longs-spyod-kyi	’khor-
lo
)	of	the	subtle	body.
13
	
The	‘life-force’	channel,	which	resembles	a	crystal	tube,	otherwise	known	as
katika
,	is	adjacent	to	the	heart-centre	(
snying-ga	chos-kyi	’khor-lo
)	of	the	subtle
body.
14
	
The	bliss-sustaining	secret	place	(
gsang-ba	bde-skyong-gi	’khor-lo
)	is	located
at	the	genitalia	of	the	subtle	body.
15
	
The	ornaments	(
rgyan
)	worn	by	the	peaceful	deities	include	the	five	silks
(
dar-gyi	chas-gos	lnga
),	
i.e.
	scarves,	pendants,	blouse,	skirt,	and	sleeves;	and	the
eight	jewels,	
i.e.
	crown,	earring,	throat	necklace,	shoulder	ornament,	mid-length
necklace,	long	necklace,	bracelets	and	anklets.	On	the	symbolism	of	these

ornaments,	see	T.	Norbu,	
The	Small	Golden	Key
,	pp.	77-8.
16
	
Tib.	
lhan-skyes	ye-shes
.
17
	
Tib.	
khrag-’thung	lha-tshogs.
	A	synonym	for	herukas	or	wrathful	deities.
18
	
Tib.	
gnas-kyi	ke’u-ri-ma	ma-mo	brgyad
.	Here	
gnas
	is	equivalent	to	the	eight
classes	of	consciousness	(
rnam-shes	tshogs-brgyad
).	See	Longchen	Rabjampa,
GGFTC,	p.	1170.
19
	
Tib.	
mthing-nag
.	DR,	p.	188.	l.	6	reads	
mthing-skya
,	but	see	Ch.	6,	p.	107,
and	Ch.	11,	p.	264.
20
	
Tib.	
yul-bdag	sing-ha	phra-men	brgyad.
The	eight	sensory	objects	are	the
objects	of	the	corresponding	eight	classes	of	consciousness.	See	Longchen
Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	p.	1170.
21
	
These	Four	Female	Gatekeepers	of	the	wrathful	assembly	also	have	distinct
names:	the	wrathful	counterpart	of	Aṅkuśā	is	Vajratejas
ῑ
,	of	Pāśā	Vajrāmoghā,	of
Sphoṭā	Vajralokā,	and	of	Ghaṇṭā	Vajravetāl
ῑ.
22
	
This	and	the	following	verse	concern	the	assembly	of	the	twenty-eight	Iśvar
ῑ
(
dbang-phyug-ma	nyer-brgyad
)	on	the	outermost	rings	of	the	wrathful	maṇḍala,
who	are	collectively	referred	to	as	the	‘emanational	enactors	of	the	four	rites	of
enlightened	activity’.	Among	these,	the	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	east	who	enact	the
white	rites	of	pacification	(
shar-nas	zhi-ba’i	las-mdzad	rnal-’byor	dbang-phyug
drug
)	are	sometimes	depicted	holding	a	vajra	in	addition	to	their	individual
hand-emblems,	indicating	that	they	belong	to	the	retinue	of	Vajra	Heruka	in	the
east.	Among	them,	Manurākṣas
ῑ
	in	Ch.	5	is	simply	described	as	‘white’	(
dkar-
mo
)	and	in	Ch.	11	as	‘dark	brown’	(
smug-nag
).	Also,	in	Ch.	11,	Brahmāṇ
ῑ
	is
erroneously	described	as	‘red-yellow’	(
dmar-se
),	Kaumār
ῑ
	as	solely	red	(
dmar-
mo
),	and	Vaiṣṇāv
ῑ
	as	solely	‘blue’	(
sngon-mo
).
23
	
Vajrā	is	also	known	as	Piṅgalā.	See	Ch.	11,	p.	265.
24
	
The	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	south	who	enact	the	yellow	rites	of	enrichment	(
lho-
nas	rgyas-pa’i	las-mdzad	rnal-’byor	dbang-phyug	drug
)	are	sometimes	depicted
holding	a	jewel	in	addition	to	their	individual	hand-emblems,	indicating	that	they
belong	to	the	retinue	of	Ratna	Heruka	in	the	south.
25
	
The	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	west	who	enact	the	red	rites	of	subjugation	(
nub-nas
dbang-gi	las-mdzad	rnal-’byor	dbang-phyug	drug
)	are	sometimes	depicted
holding	a	lotus	in	addition	to	their	individual	hand-emblems,	indicating	that	they

belong	to	the	retinue	of	Padma	Heruka	in	the	west.	Among	them,	in	Ch.	11,
Ekacāriṇ
ῑ
	is	erroneously	described	as	‘yellow’	(
ser-mo
),	Rudhiramad
ῑ
	as	solely
‘red’	(
dmar-mo
),	and	Siddhikar
ῑ
	as	solely	‘green’	(
ljang-khu
).	The	Sanskrit
identifications	for	Rudhiramad
ῑ
,	the	consort	of	Mahābala	(
stobschen
	
),
Siddhikar
ῑ
,	the	consort	of	Vasurakṣita	(
nor-srung
),	and	the	
rākṣas
ῑ
	
Ekacāraṇ
ῑ
(
srin-mo
)	are	derived	from	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	p.	1126.
26
	
The	six	yogin
ῑ
	from	the	north	who	enact	the	rites	of	wrath	(
byang-nas	drag-
po’i	las-mdzad	rnal-’byor	dbang-phyug	drug
)	are	sometimes	depicted	holding	a
crossed-vajra	in	addition	to	their	individual	hand-emblems,	indicating	that	they
belong	to	the	retinue	of	Karma	Heruka	in	the	north.	Among	them,	in	Ch.	11,
Agnāy
ῑ
	and	Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ
	are	described	as	solely	‘red’	(
dmar-mo
),	Varāh
ῑ
	as	solely
‘black’	(
nag-mo
),	and	Varunāṇ
ῑ
	and	Vāyudev
ῑ
	as	solely	‘blue’	(
sngon-mo
	
).	Also,
in	Ch.	11	(Varanasi	reprint)	Vāyudev
ῑ
	is	depicted	as	‘snake-headed’	instead	of
‘wolf-headed’.
27
	
This	verse	concerns	the	four	yogin
ῑ
	who	enact	their	emanational	rites	at	the
outermost	gates	of	the	skull	(
sprul-pa’i	las-mdzad	dbang-phyug	sgo-ma	bzhi
),
and	who	complete	the	group	of	twenty-eight	Iśvar
ῑ.
	Note	that	while	in	our	text
all	four	of	these	gatekeepers	are	generally	referred	to	by	the	collective	name
Vajrā	(
rdo-rje-ma
),	their	distinctive	names	are	found	in	Ch.	14,	pp.	370	-	71,	and
in	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	1127-28.
28
	
These	are	the	fifty-eight	wrathful	deities,	with	the	addition	of	Mahottara
Heruka	and	Krodh
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
29
	
The	three	smeared	sacraments	(
byug-pa’i	rdzas	gsum
)	of	the	charnel	ground,
‘ashes,	blood	and	grease’	(
thal-chen	rakta	zhag-gi	zo-ris
),	indicate	that	they	have
subdued	envy.	The	‘skirts	of	moist	hide	and	flayed	tiger-skin’	(
ko-rlon	gYang-
gzhi	stag-gi	sham-thabs
)	indicate	that	delusion,	attachment	and	aversion	are
respectively	subdued	by	the	ten	powers	(
daśabala
),	desireless	compassion	and
wrathful	compassion.	The	snakes	indicate	their	subjugation	of	the	five	social
classes.	For	a	description	of	the	symbolism	of	the	wrathful	deities	in	general,	see
T.	Norbu,	
The	Small	Golden	Key
,	pp.	78-84.	In	addition	to	the	five	herukas
(
khrag-’thung	khro-bo’i	tshogs
),	five	krodh
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	(
dbying-phyug	khro-mo’i
tshogs
),	eight	mātaraḥ,	eight	piśāc
ῑ
,	twenty-eight	
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	(
dbang-phyug	mgo-
brnyan	tshogs
),	and	four	gatekeepers	(
sgo-ma	bzhi
)	described	in	the	previous
verses,	the	wrathful	maṇḍala	also	includes	the	eight	great	projectresses	(
spor-
byed	chen-mo
),	who	propel	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	to	higher	rebirths,

and	who	are	enumerated	individually	in	Ch.	6,	pp.	108-9.
30
	
Here	‘fields’	translates	the	Tibetan	term	
khams
	(‘sensory	spectra’)	rather	than
skye-mched
	(‘sensory	activity	fields’).
31
	
This	verse	is	derived	from	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear
of	the	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	phrang-grol-gyi	smon-lam
),	on	which	see	Ch.
12,	pp.	314-16.
32
	
On	the	attainment	of	buddhahood	during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
(
chos-nyid	bar-do
),	see	below,	Ch.	11,	pp.	226-32.
33
	
Tib.	
Bar-do	thos-grol.
	See	below,	Ch.	11,	pp.	217-303.
34
	
Tib.	
Zhi-khro’i	las-byang	tshor-ba	rang-grol.
	On	this	
sādhana
	text,	see
Appendix	One,	p.	382.
35
	
Tib.	
gSang-dbang	rig-pa	rang-grol.
	This	is	one	of	the	empowerment	texts
related	to	the	cycle	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	See	Appendix	One.
36
	
Tib.	
bsKong-bshags	nyams-chags	rang-grol.
	See	below,	Ch.	7,	pp.	113-50.
6	Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration
1
	
Tib.	
Bar-do	thos-grol.
2
	
Tib.	
brGya-phyag	sdig-sgrib	rang-grol.
3
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
4
	
A	Sanskrit	term,	indicating	obeisance	or	homage.
5
	
The	Delhi	reprint	of	
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
	includes	an	annotation	to	the
effect	that	when	generating	the	visualisation	of	the	maṇḍala	in	front	rather	than
prostrating	to	an	already	clearly	visualised	assembly,	the	words	‘I	bow	down	to
such	and	such	a	buddha-body’	(
sku-la	phyag-’tshal-lo
)	should	be	replaced	by	the
words	‘such	and	such	a	buddha-body	is	primordially	and	radiantly	present’	(
sku-
ni	ye-nas	gsal
).
6
	
Tib.	
chos-kyi	khams
.
7
	
Tib.	
mtshan-’dzin
.	Here	substantialism	refers	to	the	grasping	at	characteristics,
having	failed	to	understand	that	they	lack	inherent	existence.

8
	
DR	here	reads	‘green-black’	(
ljang-nag
),	but	see	Ch.	5,	p.	81,	and	Ch.	11,	p.
264,	where	she	is	depicted	as	solely	‘black’.
9
	
Note	that	Ulūkamukh
ῑ
	is	described	here	as	holding	an	iron	hook	(
lcags-kyu
),
instead	of	a	vajra,	as	in	Ch.	5,	p.	83,	and	Ch.	11,	p.	264.
10
	
According	to	GGFTC,	p.	1135,	Sphoṭā	may	also	have	a	bear-head	(
dom-
mgo
).
11
	
According	to	GGFTC,	p.	1135,	Ghaṇṭā	may	also	have	a	wolf-head	(
spyang-
mgo
).
12
	
Tib.	
Zhags-’phen-ma
.
13
	
Tib.	
mDung-thung	’phen-ma
.
14
	
Tib.	
sPor-byed	dril-’khrol-ma
.
15
	
Tib.	
sPor-byed	khyung-thogs-ma
.
16
	
Tib.	
sPor-byed	skar-mda’	’phen-ma.
17
	
This	is	a	reference	to	the	great	mythological	battle	(
gYul-chen
)	between	the
gods	and	antigods,	on	which	see	Antigods	in	glossary.
18
	
Tib.	
sPor-byed	rdo-rje	glog-phreng	’dzin-ma.
19
	
Tib.	
sPor-byed	glags-sha	rdeb-ma.
20
	
Tib.	s
Por-byed	ral-gri	’dzin-ma
.
21
	
Vajrā	is	more	commonly	known	as	Piṅgalā	(
dga’-ba
).	See	Ch.	11,	p.	265.
22
	
See	Ch.	5,	p.	86.	DR	reads	‘green’.
23
	
The	number	110	comprises	the	verses	dedicated	to	the	Hundred	Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities,	with	the	addition	of	two	verses	dedicated	to	Mahottara	Heruka
and	Krodheśvar
ῑ
,	as	well	as	eight	verses	dedicated	to	the	Projectresses	(
spor-
chen	brgyad
).
24
	
Tib.	
Na-rag	bskang-bshags.
	A	celebrated	treasure-doctrine	(
gter-chos
)
revealed	during	the	thirteenth	century	by	Guru	Chowang,	and	included	within
his	
Eight	Transmitted	Precepts:	Consummation	of	All	Secrets
	(
bKa’-brgyad
gsang-ba	yongs-rdzogs
).	On	this	text,	see	K.	Dowman	(trans.),	‘Emptying	the
Depths	of	Hell’,	in	
Flight	of	the	Garuda
,	pp.	53-61;	also	D.	Christensen	(trans.),
Na-rag	bskang-bshags
.

7	Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
1
	
Tib.	
Zhi-khro’i	klong-bshags	brjod-pa	rang-grol
.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
The	offerings	and	dedications	of	great	magnitude	attributed	to	the	bodhisattva
Samantabhadra	are	recounted	in	the	
Avataṃsakasūtra
.	See	T.	Cleary	(trans.),	
The
Flower	Ornament	Scripture
,	pp.	1135	ff.;	and	P.	Williams,	
Mahāyāna	Buddhism
,
pp.	125-7.
4
	
Tib.	
gnyis-med	byang-chub-sems
.
5
	
i.e.
	the	monastic	vows	of	the	
prātimokṣa
	(
so-sor	thar-pa
)	discipline,	on	which
see	glossary.
6
	
DR,	p.	409,	l.	2,	reads:	
srab-la	’phyar-bas
	.	.	.	Here	we	follow	the	Varanasi
reprint:	
’phyor-la	gYeng-bas
.	The	Delhi	reprint	reads:	
srog-la	’tshal-bas
.
7
	
In	the	context	of	the	maṇḍala	of	wrathful	deities,	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality
is	represented	by	Mahottara	Heruka.
8
	
In	the	context	of	the	maṇḍala	of	wrathful	deities,	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource	(
sambhogakāya
)	is	represented	by	the	Five	Herukas	and	their	consorts.
9
	
The	Four	Piśāc
ῑ
	situated	in	the	cardinal	directions	of	the	wrathful	assembly,
namely,	Simhamukh
ῑ
,	Vyāghr
ῑ
mukh
ῑ
,	Srgālamukh
ῑ
,	and	Svānamukh
ῑ
,	as	their
names	suggest,	possess	fangs,	while	those	of	the	intermediate	directions:
Gṛdhramukh
ῑ
,	Kaṅkamukh
ῑ
,	Kākamukh
ῑ
,	and	Ulūkamukh
ῑ
	are	winged	figures.
10
	
Generally	the	Twenty-eight	
Ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	are	associated	with	the	complete	four	rites
or	aspects	of	enlightened	activity	(
las-bzhi
)	and	not	only	
abhicāra
.
11
	
DR,	p.	412,	l.	6,	
’gugs-’ching-sdom-dgyes
.	The	Delhi	reprint	misreads	
’gyed
for	
’gyes
,	while	the	Varanasi	reprint	misreads	
’phying
	for	
’ching
	and	
dgyes
	for
’gyes.
12
	
Tib.	
sha-khrag	mchod-pa
.	This	refers	to	the	offering	of	the	five	meats	and
five	nectars,	on	which	see	G.	Dorje,	‘The	Nyingma	Interpretation	of
Commitment	and	Vow’,	in	
The	Buddhist	Forum
,	Vol.	2,	pp.	71-95.
13
	
Tib.	
ma-bdun	sring-bzhi
.	On	this	group	of	eleven	peripheral	ḍākin
ῑ
s,	who	are
classed	as	protectors	in	the	retinue	of	Śr
ῑ
dev
ῑ
,	see	Jigme	Lingpa,	
dPal-chen	’dus-
pa
.

14
	
The	wardens	of	the	secret	abodes	(
ti-ra	gnas-nyul/	gnas-nyul	chen-po
)	are	the
protector	deities	associated	with	the	sacred	power-places	or	pilgrimage	places	of
Tibet.
15
	
Tib.	
rdo-rje	rgyal-thab/thib
.
16
	
Tib.	
bstan-pa’i	sgron-me
	is	here	used	as	an	epithet	of	the	assistant	vajra-
master.	DR,	p.	416,	reads:	
ston-pa’i	sgron-ma
.
17
	
Tib.	
sgrol-ging	bdag-po
	is	an	epithet	of	Citipati,	an	acolyte	of	Yama,	Lord	of
Death.
18
	
i.e.
	
the	four	female	gatekeepers	of	the	wrathful	assembly,	Vajratejas
ῑ
,
Vajrāmoghā,	Vajralokā,	and	Vajravetāl
ῑ
,	who	‘summon	and	guide’	(
’gug-’dren
pho-nya
).
19
	
The	rampant	egohood	which	can	result	from	improper	application	of
Buddhist	practices,	particularly	the	tantras,	is	exemplified	by	the	archetypal
demonic	form	Rudra,	who	is	compassionately	‘liberated’	by	the	wrathful	deities.
Accounts	concerning	the	past	lives	of	Rudra	are	to	be	found	in	the	
mDo	dgongs-
pa	‘dus-pa
,	Chs.	22-31,	147.5.1ff.;	in	Yeshe	Tshogyal,	
The	Life	and	Liberation	of
Padmasambhava
,	Pt.	I,	pp.	26-47,	and	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	1080-
95.
20
	
Here	we	follow	the	Delhi	reprint:	
byings
.	DR,	p.	418,	reads	
gYeng
.
21
	
Tib.	
byams-mgon	thugs-rje-can
,	
i.e.
	Vajrasattva,	to	whom	this	entreaty	is
made.
22
	
lit.	albugo	(
ling-tog
).
23
	
Tib.	
kun-nas	zlum-po’i	thig-le
.
24
	
Tib.	DR,	pp.	423-4,	
gzung-’dzin	gnyis-su	’dzin-pa	nyon-re-mongs
/	
rig-pa	ye-
shes	klong-du	bshags-par	bgyi
.	Note	that	the	Delhi	reprint	reads:	
yod-dang	med-
par	lta-ba	nyon-re-mongs
/	
rtag-chad	med-pa’i	ye-shes	klong-du	bshags
.
25
	
On	the	practices	pertaining	to	this	distinction,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,
GGFTC,	pp.	900-914.
26
	
Tib.	
bhaga
.
27
	
Tib.	
yi-dam	phyag-rgya
.	On	the	linking	of	the	seals	of	the	deities	and	the
recitation	of	mantra,	see	glossary	under	Seal	and	Mantras.

28
	
i.e.
	the	secret	name	(
gsang-mtshan
)	conferred	by	a	vajra-master	in	the	course
of	an	empowerment	ceremony.
29
	
Tib.	
mngon-rtogs
.
30
	
The	principal	Nyingma	text	elucidating	the	integration	of	the	vinaya,
bodhisattva,	and	mantra	vows	expressed	in	this	verse	is	Ngari	Paṇchen’s
Ascertainment	of	the	Three	Vows
	(
sDom-gsum	rnam-nges
).
31
	
Tib.	
sKongs-bshags	nyams-chags	rang-grol.
	This	text,	which	is	included
within	the	wider	cycle	of	
The	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation
[
through	Recognition
]	
of	Enlightened	Intention
,	comprises	both	empowerments
and	generation-stage	practices.	See	Appendix	One.
32
	
According	to	the	tradition	of	the	treasure-doctrines	(
gter-chos
),	there	are	four
kinds	of	seal	associated	with	the	transmission	of	such	teachings,	namely:	the	seal
of	commitment	(
samaya-rgya
),	the	seal	of	treasures	(
gter-rgya
),	the	seal	of
concealment	(
sbas-rgya
),	and	the	seal	of	entrustment	or	succession	(
gtadrgya
	
).
See	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	Vol.	2,	p.	77.
8	Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual
Indications	and	Signs	of	Death
1
	
Tib.	’
Chi-ltas	mtshan-ma	rang-grol.
	The	recognition	of	the	signs	and	portents
of	impending	death	is	also	discussed	in	the	context	of	Tibetan	medicine.	See
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	47-52,	and	pp.	203-8.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol.
3
	
Tib.	
bar-do	thos-pa	rang-grol
.	See	Ch.	11.
4
	
For	a	discussion	on	the	Buddhist	phenomenological	analysis	of	the	aggregate
of	form	(
rūpaskandha
),	which	constitutes	the	human	body,	see	L.	Pruden
(trans.),	
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
.,	Ch.	1,	The	Dhātus,	pp.	63ff.
5
	
Indications	or	symptoms	of	untimely	death	(
dus-min	’chi-ba
)	may	be	treated
by	ritual	purification,	as	recommended	in	this	text,	or	by	medical	means,	on
which	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	p.	85.	On	the	course	of	the	lifespan
principle	within	the	body,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	p.	39.
6
	
The	ritual	deception	of	death	(
’chi	bslu-ba
)	is	the	subject	of	Ch.	9.

7
	
It	should	be	stressed	that	the	specificity	of	the	external	signs	of	impending
death	and	the	prognostications	listed	here	are	to	be	understood	in	the	context	of
the	spiritual	practices	outlined	in	other	chapters	of	this	cycle,	since	the
examination	cannot	be	undertaken	in	isolation	from	them.
8
	
Tib.	
’chi-bdag	lag-tu	song-ba
.	Lord	of	Death	is	an	epithet	of	Yama.
9
	
i.e.
	one	calendar	day	or	lunar	day	(
tshes
),	comprising	twenty-four	hours.
10
	
Vital	breath	is	an	aspect	of	vital	energy	(
rlung
;	Skt.	
vāyu
),	on	which	see
glossary	under	Vital	Energy.
11
	
DR,	Vol.	3,	p.	181,	l.	4,	reads	
zhag	’ga’
	(‘some	days’),	but	we	have	taken	the
present	reading	from	the	Delhi	reprint.
12
	
For	an	account	of	the	examination	of	dreams	from	the	perspective	of	Tibetan
medicine,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	49-52,	and	205-8.
13
	
Tib.	
rgyal-pos	srog-gcad
.	Here	we	follow	the	Delhi	reprint	(p.	438,	l.	3).	DR,
p.	182,	l.	1,	reads	
rgyal-po’i	srog-bcad.
14
	
Tib.	
byang-chub	mchog-tu	sems-bskyed
.	See	Ch.	1,	pp.	14-15.
15
	
Tib.	
dbang-gsum	dam-tshig.
	See	glossary	under	Four	Empowerments	and
Commitments.
16
	
See	also	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	51-2;	and	for	remote	indications	of
death	discernible	to	the	physician	approaching	the	residence	of	a	patient,	ibid.,
pp.	47-8.	Note	that	DR,	p.	186,	l.	1,	reads	
gzungs
	for	
gzugs
.
17
	
i.e.
	the	full-moon	day	of	the	lunar	month.
18
	
This	mantra	is	that	of	the	‘lord	who	subsumes	the	lifespan’.
19
	
The	other	suitable	hand-implements	(
phyag-mtshan
)	include	the	vajra	and
bell.
20
	
The	letter	A	is	symbolic	of	emptiness	(
śūnyatā
).
21
	
This	cross-legged	posture	(
rdo-rje	skyil-krung
)	and	folded	hand-gesture	of
meditative	equipoise	(
lag-pa	mnyam-bzhag
)	are	both	aspects	of	the	seven-point
posture	of	Vairocana	(
rnam-snang	chos-bdun
),	on	which	see	glossary.
22
	
Tib.	
brtan-pa’i	lha-dang	bral-ba
.
23
	
Tib.	
spyi-gtsug	bzlog-na.
	Our	reading	here	follows	the	Delhi	reprint	(p.	450,	l.

2).	DR,	p.	188,	1.	6,	has	
spyi-gtsug	’dug-na
.
24
	
Tib.	
gnas-lugs	zab-mo’i	lta-ba
.
25
	
Tib.	
rlung-yum	shor-ba
.
26
	
Note	that	DR	(p.	191,	1.	2)	and	the	Indian	reprints	all	read	‘six	months’	(
zla-
ba	drug
).
27
	
For	a	discussion	on	the	elaborate	procedures	for	urinalysis	in	general,	see
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	139-48,	and	295-304.
28
	
On	this	portent	known	as	‘setting	of	the	unchanging	sun	at	the	summit	of
Mount	Sumeru’	(
ri-rab	rtse-la	mi-’gyur	nyi-ma	nub
),	the	method	of	ritually
averting	death	is	unspecified	in	Ch.	9.	Note	that	the	Delhi	reprint	has	an
annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	there	are	small	circles	of	light,	this	portends
that	the	subject	will	fall	ill’.
29
	
The	Delhi	reprint	has	an	annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	there	is	a	slight
humming	sound,	this	portends	that	the	subject	will	fall	ill’.
30
	
On	this	portent	known	as	‘rupturing	of	the	Wish-granting	Tree	from	the
Summit	of	Mount	Sumeru’	(
ri-rab	rtse-nas	dpag-bsam	ljon-shing	chag
),	the
method	of	ritually	averting	death	is	unspecified	in	Ch.	9.	Note	that	the	Delhi
version	has	an	annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	there	is	a	slight	trace	of
evaporation,	this	portends	that	the	subject	will	fall	ill’.
31
	
Yavati	is	more	specifically	identified	as	an	acolyte	of	Mahākāla,	or	as	an
aspect	of	Pehar.	The	Delhi	version	has	an	annotation	adding	that:	‘if,	instead,	the
tuft	of	hair	stands	up	alone	for	a	short	time,	this	portends	that	one	will	fall	ill’.
On	the	posterior	and	pterion	fontanelles	subsumed	in	the	phrase	
ltag-pa’i	bdud-
sgo-dag
,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintin
gs,	pp.	249-50.
32
	
Tib.	
’chi-ltas	thor-bu
.	On	this	category	of	signs,	which	are	also	classified	as
‘sudden	changes	relating	to	death’	(
glo-bur	rnam-gyur-gyi	’chi-ltas
)	within	the
Tibetan	medical	tradition,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	207-8.
33
	
See	Chapter	10	for	these	practices.
34
	
As	stated	in	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	56,	the
sequence	may	alter	as	far	as	the	dissolution	of	the	outer	elements	is	concerned.
35
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	a
mirage,	and	the	subject’s	vision	will	become	unclear.	On	this	dissolution	of	the

earth	element	into	the	water	element,	and	its	coincidence	with	the	disintegration
of	the	navel	energy-centre	of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of
Mindfulness
,	pp.	54-5.
36
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	a
misty	smoke;	and	the	subject’s	hearing	will	become	unclear.	On	this	dissolution
of	the	water	element	into	the	fire	element,	and	its	coincidence	with	the
disintegration	of	the	heart	energy-centre	of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	55.
37
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	red
fireflies,	and	the	subject’s	ability	to	smell	will	cease.	The	location	of	the	body
from	which	the	warmth	recedes	indicates	the	place	of	subsequent	rebirth,	as
indicated	on	pp.	177-9.	On	this	dissolution	of	the	fire	element	into	the	air
element,	and	its	coincidence	with	the	disintegration	of	the	throat	energy-centre
of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
	
,	p.	55.
38
	
At	this	juncture	the	secret	sign	of	the	impending	luminosity	appears	like	a
flaming	torch,	and	the	subject’s	ability	to	taste	will	cease.	On	this	dissolution	of
the	wind	element	into	the	space	element	or	consciousness,	and	its	coincidence
with	the	disintegration	of	the	sexual	energy-centre	of	the	body,	see	Tsele	Natsok
Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	55-6.	The	five	sense-faculties	and	the
sensory	spectra	are	also	dissolved	at	this	juncture.	From	this	point	onwards,
death	cannot	be	reversed.
39
	
Note	that	in	other	texts	of	this	genre,	the	descent	of	whiteness	precedes	the
ascent	of	redness.	However,	Jigme	Lingpa	in	his	
sKu-gsum	zhing-khams	sbyong-
smon
	follows	the	sequence	outlined	here,	and	according	to	Tsele	Natsok
Rangdrol,	op.	cit.,	p.	57,	it	is	uncertain	whether	the	whiteness	or	redness	will
manifest	first.
40
	
Tib.	
srog-rtsa.
	The	so-called	‘black	life	channel’	(
srog-rtsa	nag-po
)	is
identified	with	the	aorta,	in	Tibetan	medicine,	while	the	‘white	life-channel’
(
srog-rtsa	dkar-po
)	is	identified	with	the	spinal	cord.	See	
Tibetan	Medical
Paintings
,	pp.	191-2,	and	197-8.
41
	
On	the	significance	of	the	syllables	HI	KA	in	the	transference	of
consciousness	(
’pho-ba
),	see	Ch.	10,	pp.	203-4.
42
	
On	the	dissolution	of	consciousness	into	inner	radiance	(
’od-gsal
;	Skt.
prabhāsvara
	
)	during	the	intermediate	state	of	the	moment	of	death	(
’chi-kha’i

bar-do
),	see	Ch.	11,	pp.	227-34.
43
	
On	the	mother	and	child	aspects	of	reality,	otherwise	known	as	the	naturally
occurring	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	and	the	cultivated	inner	radiance	of	the
path,	see	Ch.	11,	pp.	227-34.	The	latter	is	the	intrinsic	awareness	cultivated	by
meditators	during	their	lifetime.
44
	
The	period	following	the	cessation	of	the	coarse	outer	breath	(
phyi-dbugs
)
and	before	the	cessation	of	the	subtle	inner	breath	(
nang-dbugs
),	also	known	as
the	life-sustaining	wind	(
srog-’dzin-gyi	rlung
;	Skt.	
prāṇa
),	is	that	during	which
the	vital	energy	and	mind	are	drawn	together	into	the	central	channel,	causing
ordinary	beings	to	lapse	into	unconsciousness.	On	this	distinction	between	inner
breath	and	outer	breath,	see	also	Ch.	11,	p.	228.
45
	
The	inner	radiance	of	the	path	(
lam-gyi	’od-gsal
)	is	that	experienced	by
practitioners	and	yogins	through	their	spiritual	practices	prior	to	death.	See
glossary	under	Inner	Radiance.
46
	
Tib.	
gnod-sbyin
.	Other	texts	suggest	that	this	mode	of	rebirth	is	indicated	by
the	emission	of	consciousness	from	the	nose.	See	Lati	Rinpoche	and	J.	Hopkins,
Death,	Intermediate	State	and	Rebirth	in	Tibetan	Buddhism
,	p.	53;	also	A.
Wayman,	
The	Buddhist	Tantras
,	p.	141.	On	the	term	
yakṣa
,	see	glossary.
47
	
On	the	transference	of	consciousness	(
’pho-ba
)	through	the	crown	fontanelle,
and	the	appearance	of	serum	at	the	crown	of	the	head	as	an	indication	of	success
in	this	practice,	see	below,	Ch.	10,	pp.	203-4.
48
	
Tib.	
sKu-gdung	’bar-ba’i	rgyud.
	This	text	is	one	of	the	Seventeen	Tantras	of
the	Esoteric	Instructional	Class	of	the	Great	Perfection	(
rdzogs-chen	man-ngag
sde’i	rgyud	bcu-bdun
),	and	is	contained	in	NGB,	Vol.	3.
49
	
Tib.	
bTags-grol
.	This	text	forms	the	subject	matter	of	Ch.	14,	pp.	347-79.
50
	
As	explained	in	Ch.	10.
51
	
Tib.	
Bar-do	thos-grol.
	This	text	is	the	subject	matter	of	Ch.	11,	pp.	225-303.
52
	
Tib.	
’Chi-ba	bslu-ba.
	This	text	is	the	subject	matter	of	Ch.	9,	pp.	184-95.
53
	
The	presence	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	within	the	heart	and	the
brain	has	already	been	explained	in	detail.	See	Ch.	5,	pp.	67-88.

9	Natural	Liberation	of	Fear
1
	
Tib.	
’Chi-bslu	’jigs-pa	rang-grol
.	The	
Tengyur
	contains	a	number	of	ritual
texts,	similar	to	the	present	chapter,	concerning	the	deception	of	death	(
’chi-ba
bslu-ba
;	Skt.	
mṛtyuṣṭhāpaka
),	including	those	by	Tathāgatarakṣita	(T	1702),
Vāg
ῑ
śvarak
ῑ
rti	(T	1748),	and	Ajitamitragupta	(T	2839).	A	hybrid	Sanskrit	title
Krodha	amukha	bhela
	is	also	attributed	to	the	present	text.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
The	Varanasi	reprint,	p.	213,	reads	Vajrakumāra	(
rdo-rje	gzhon-nu
).	DR,	p.
206,	1.I,	reads	only	
gzhon-nu
.	Vajrakumāra	is	the	subject	of	this	invocation,
being	the	embodiment	of	buddha-activity.
4
	
The	earliest	extant	literature	on	guidance	through	the	intermediate	states
appears	to	have	a	strong	association	with	this	particular	bodhisattva.	See	
e.g.
Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra
,	and	M.	Lalou,	‘Chemins	du	mort	dans	les	croyances	de
haute-asie’,	which	includes	a	translation	of	an	ancient	Dunhuang	manuscript
entitled	
Exposé	du	chemin	du	mort
	(
gshin-lam	bslan-ba
),	where	Avalokiteśvara
is	referred	to	particularly	as	a	deity	who	guides	and	rescues	those	propelled
towards	hellish	rebirths.
5
	
On	the	course	of	the	lifespan	principle	(
tshe’i	rtsa
),	subsuming	the	five
elements,	over	a	monthly	cycle,	and	the	location	of	the	vulnerable	points	of	the
body	in	relation	to	it,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	39-40.
6
	
Tib.	
rlung-gi	’khor-lo
.	On	the	meditative	stabilities	related	to	the	five	elements,
and	the	relationship	between	the	five	colours,	the	five	elements,	and	the	five
seed-syllables,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	619-20.
7
	
These	are	the	vowels	(
a-li
)	and	consonants	(
ka-li
)	of	the	Sanskrit	alphabet,	for
the	symbolism	of	which	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	554-99.
8
	
The	deities	embodying	the	elements	correspond	to	those	of	the	Hindu
pantheon,	
e.g.
	Pavana,	who	embodies	the	wind	element,	Agni	who	embodies	the
fire	element,	Varuṇa	who	embodies	the	water	element,	and	Viṣṇu	who	embodies
the	earth	element.	For	the	Buddhist	perspective,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,
GGFTC,	pp.	1124-8.
9
	
YAṂ	is	absorbed	into	Pavana,	RAṂ	into	Agni,	LAṂ	into	Visnu,	and	KHAṂ
into	Varuṇa.

10
	
DR,	p.	209,	l.	3,	adds	an	annotation,	suggesting	that	these	should	include	the
breath	of	horses,	elephants	and	buffaloes.
11
	
DR,	p.	209,	l.	4,	adds	an	annotation	to	the	effect	that	the	syllable	RAṂ	is
inserted	into	the	effigy’s	eyes,	the	syllable	KHAṂ	into	its	ears,	the	syllable
LAṂ	into	its	tongue,	the	syllable	YAṂ	into	its	nose,	and	the	syllable	E	into	its
neck.
12
	
DR,	p.	209,	l.	6,	adds	that	the	effigy	should	be	black	when	offered	to	male
malevolent	forces	(
bdud
),	red	when	offered	to	martial	haunting	spirits	(
btsan
)
and	hybrid	serpentine	haunting	spirits	(
klu-btsan
),	yellow	when	offered	to	hybrid
serpentine	and	plague-causing	spirits	(
klu-gnyan
)	and	malign	goblins	(
the’u-
rang
),	white	when	offered	to	the	king	spirits	(
rgyal-po
),	green	when	offered	to
the	female	malevolent	forces	(
bdud-mo
)	and	rural	divinities	(
yul-lha
),	and
multicoloured	when	offered	to	earth-ogres	(
sa-srin
).
13
	
Tib.	
ltas-ngan-gyi	bya-sgrog
.	Feathers	of	the	owl	in	particular	are	deemed	to
be	harbingers	of	ill-omens.
14
	
The	sense	organs	are	here	consecrated	with	seed-syllables	indicative	of	each
of	the	five	elements	in	turn,	beginning	with	LAṂ,	the	seed-syllable	of	the	earth
element.
15
	
The	Heart-mantra	of	Dependent	Origination	(
rten-’brel	snying-po
),	which
liberates	the	enduring	continuum	of	phenomena	and	induces	the	appearance	of
multiplying	relics	(
’phel-gdung
)	and	rainbow	lights,	is:	YE	DHARMĀ	HETU-
PRABHAVĀ	HETUN	TEṢĀṂ	TATHĀGATO	HY	AVADAT	TESĀM	CA	YO
NIRODHO	EVAṂ	VĀDĪ	MAHĀŚRAMAṆAḤ	(‘Whatever	events	arise	from	a
cause,	the	Tathāgata	has	told	the	cause	thereof,	and	the	great	virtuous	ascetic	has
taught	their	cessation	as	well’).	See	also	Ch.	14,	p.	376;	and	S.	Beyer,	
The	Cult
of	Tārā
,	p.	146.
16
	
On	the	symbolism	of	the	Sanskrit	syllable	A,	indicative	of	emptiness,	see
GGFTC,	pp.	559-63.	This	syllable	is	frequently	utilised	as	a	focal	point	for	the
meditations	of	calm	abiding	(
śamatha
),	in	which	case	it	is	visualised	at	the	tip	of
the	nose.	There	are	recorded	instances	of	the	syllable	actually	manifesting	on	the
tip	of	the	nose	of	certain	great	meditation	masters	of	the	past.	See	
e.g.
	the	life	of
Kumārādza	in	NSTB,	pp.	568-72.
17
	
On	the	seed-syllable	BHRŪṂ,	the	first	of	the	mantras	through	which	the
maṇḍala	of	the	peaceful	deities	is	generated,	specifically	referring	to	the	creative

visualisation	of	the	celestial	palaces	of	the	deities,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,
GGFTC,	pp.	689-90.
18
	
On	the	seed-syllable	KṢA,	which	is	the	final	seed-syllable	of	the	mandala	of
the	peaceful	deities,	specifically	referring	to	Buddha	Samantabhadra,	see
Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	p.	591.
19
	
The	short	syllable	HŪṂ	has	a	contracted	
anusvāra
,	in	which	the	crescent	and
nāda
	are	subsumed	in	the	
bindu.
20
	
The	syllable	MĀṂ	is	that	of	the	female	buddha	Māmak
ῑ.
	See	Longchen
Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	691-2.
21
	
The	syllable	MŪṂ	is	that	the	female	buddha	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ.
	See	Longchen
Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	p.	691.
22
	
Tib.	
rtsa	gnyid-log.
	See	Ch.	11,	p.	228.
23
	
On	the	diverse	divisions	of	the	Buddhist	scriptures	(
gsung-rab
)	from	the
Nyingma	point	of	view,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	73-87.
24
	
The	rituals	referred	to	here	are	somewhat	unclear,	but	for	the	treatment	of
diseases	pertaining	to	the	five	solid	viscera	and	the	six	hollow	viscera,	see
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	101-2,	and	pp.	257-8.
25
	
The	following	series	of	signs	of	near	death	are	observed	in	the	urine
specimen.	Note	that	whereas	here	it	is	the	urine	scum	(
spris-ma
)	that	appears
blue	or	red,	in	Ch.	8,	p.	170,	these	colours	are	attributed	to	the	urine	vapour
(
rlangs-pa
).	See	
also	the	elaborate	explanations	of	urinalysis	given	in	
Tibetan
Medical	Paintings
	
,	pp.	139-48,	and	pp.	295-304.
26
	
The	combination	of	the	five	elements	(
khams-lnga
)	with	the	twelve	animal
year-signs	is	an	important	feature	of	elemental	divination	(
’byung-rtsis
),	on
which	see	G.	Dorje,	
Tibetan	Elemental	Divination	Paintings
,	pp.	66-86.
27
	
The	Delhi	reprint	adds	an	annotation	to	the	effect	that	this	is	also	applicable	if
the	humming	sound	disappears	intermittently.
28
	
At	this	point,	the	various	versions	of	our	text	include	the	following	paragraph:
‘In	cases	when	[one’s	shadow]	is	missing	from	the	neck	upwards,	one	should
visualise	the	syllable	YAṂ	in	the	subject’s	heart,	and	gaze	upwards	as	high	as
one	can.	[Death]	will	then	be	averted	if	one	performs	ablutions	from	the	crown
downwards	with	water	[empowered	by]	mantras	of	retention.’	This	observation

appears	to	be	misplaced,	referring	as	it	does	to	the	analysis	of	the	optically
projected	shadow	rather	than	the	humming	of	the	ears.
10	Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection
1
	
Tib.	
’Pho-ba	dran-pa	rang-grol
.
2
	
Tib.	
rDzogs-rim	bar-do	drug-gi	khrid-yig.
	This	cycle	has	been	translated	into
English	by	Alan	Wallace.	See	
Natural	Liberation.
3
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
4
	
The	six	topics	of	the	perfection	stage	(
sampannakrama
)	respectively	relate	to
the	six	intermediate	states	summarised	in	Ch.	3.	Among	them,	the	yoga	of
consciousness	transference	relates	to	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
(
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
),	on	which	see	also	Ch.	11,	pp.	225-34.	At	this	point	an
annotation	in	the	text	refers	to	the	importance	of	this	chapter	as	‘an	oral
instruction	which	is	like	the	giving	of	a	royal	injunction’	(
rgyal-po	bka’-them
bskur-ba	lta-bu
).
5
	
Tib.	
’Chi-ltas	mtshan-la	rang-grol
.	See	Ch.	8,	pp.	153-81.
6
	
On	the	ritual	deception	of	death	(
’chi-bslu
),	see	above,	Ch.	9,	pp.	184-95.
7
	
Tib.	
’Chi-bslu	’jigs-pa	rang-grol.
	This	is	the	subject	matter	of	Ch.	9	above.
8
	
Consciousness	transference	may	be	taught	in	the	context	of	general	guidance
(
khrid-kyi	dus
),	as	in	the	case	of	the	preliminary	practices	(
sngon-’gro
).	See
Paltrul	Rinpoche,	
The	Words	of	My	Perfect	Teacher
,	pp.	351-65;	and	Sonam	T.
Kazi	(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-may	Zhal-lung
,	Pt.	3,	pp.	493-516.	Manuals	of
particular	guidance	on	consciousness	transference	(
’pho-ba’i	sgos-khrid
)	include
the	present	chapter	from	Karma	Lingpa’s	
Zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
	
and
Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol’s	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness,
	pp.	65-73.
9
	
Tib.	
khrid	kyi	sngon	’gro.
	See	above,	Ch.	1.
10
	
Tib.	
sa-gnon-pa’i	phyag-rgya
	(Skt.	
bhūmyākramaṇa
),	here	identified	with	the
bhūsparśamudrā
.
11
	
On	the	association	of	these	other	orifices	with	specific	modes	of	rebirth,	see
p.	214.

12
	
On	the	crown	or	anterior	fontanelle	(
tshangs-pa’i	bu-ga
),	and	its	relationship
to	the	central	energy	channel	of	the	subtle	body	(
avadhūti
),	see	
Tibetan	Medical
Paintings
,	pp.	33-40	and	pp.	189-96.
13
	
On	the	relation	between	the	central	channel	and	those	of	the	Rasanā	to	its
right	
and	the	Lalanā	to	its	left,	see	also	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	1006
ff.,	and	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	33-4.
14
	
Tib.	
khu-tshur
.
15
	
See	Ch.	3,	p.	33.
16
	
This	refers	to	the	recitation	of	Ch.	11	of	the	present	work.
17
	
On	these	transformations,	see	Ch.	8,	pp.	156-9	and	171-3.
18
	
This	reference	is	unidentified.
19
	
Tib.	
Nyi-zla	kha-sbyor.
	This	text	is	contained	in	Vol.	4	of	the	
Collected
Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
	(
rNying-ma’i	rgyud-’bum
).
20
	
The	‘field	of	accumulated	merits’	(
tshogs-bsags	zhing
),	to	whom	offerings	are
made,	comprises	one’s	parents,	invalids	or	other	disadvantaged	persons,	spiritual
teachers,	monks,	and	bodhisattvas.
21
	
Skt.	
śaraṇagamana.
	On	the	taking	of	refuge,	see	above,	Ch.	1,	pp.	11-13;	and
also	glossary.
22
	
There	are	many	diverse	techniques	of	consciousness-transference	within	the
Tibetan	tradition,	including	those	derived	from	
The	Six	Doctrines	of	Nāropā
(
Nāro	chos-drug
),	the	
Innermost	Spirituality	of	Longchenpa
	(
Klong-chen	snying-
thig
),	and	the	present	cycle.
23
	
Tib.	
thos-grol
.	The	words	to	be	communicated	in	this	context	are	contained
below,	Ch.	11,	which	includes	descriptions	of	the	three	intermediate	states	of	the
time	of	death,	reality,	and	rebirth.	The	intermediate	state	of	reality	(
chos-nyid
bar-do
)	is	also	known	as	the	intermediate	state	of	inner	radiance	(
’od-gsal
	
),	on
which	see	Ch.	11,	p.	227ff.
24
	
Just	as	there	are	outer,	inner,	and	secret	signs	of	impending	death	(see	Ch.	8,
pp.	155-71)	and	outer	and	inner	signs	of	the	efficacy	of	the	mantras	utilised	in
‘liberation	by	wearing’	(see	Ch.	14,	
passim
),	so	here,	in	the	context	of	the
various	types	of	consciousness-transference,	there	are	‘outer’	signs	observable	in
the	atmosphere,	‘inner’	signs	observable	on	the	body	of	the	deceased,	and

‘secret’	signs	observable	in	the	relics	that	emerge	after	death.	On	the	appearance
of	seed-syllables	among	the	cremated	relics	of	great	spiritual	teachers,	see	
e.g.
Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	p.	564.
25
	
The	white	syllable	ĀḤ	is	the	seed-syllable	of	Vajradhara,	the	azure	syllable
HŪṂ	is	that	of	Vajrasattva,	and	the	red	syllable	HRĪḤ	is	that	of	Avalokiteśvara.
See	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	Ch.	7,	pp.	682-93.
26
	
The	five	types	of	bone-relic	(Tib.	
dung-rigs	rnam-pa-lnga
),	which	appear
following	cremation,	are	associated	with	the	five	seed-syllables	of	the	five	male
buddhas,	and	with	five	bodily	constituents.	See	Ch.	14.	On	the	appearance	of
cremation	relics	in	the	form	of	a	deity’s	hand-implement	(
phyag-mtshan
)	or
image	(
sku-’dra
),	see	
e.g.
	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	572.
27
	
Here	the	emergence	of	fluids	from	the	left	nostril	rather	than	the	crown
fontanelle	is	an	indication	that	the	consciousness-transference	has	taken	effect
into	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	rather	than	into	the	Buddha-bodies	of
Reality	or	Perfect	Resource.	On	the	appearance	of	such	signs,	see	Ch.	14,
passim
;	and	for	a	recorded	instance	of	the	whole	skull	being	left	as	a	cremation
relic,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	p.	572.
28
	
Orgyan,	
i.e.
	an	epithet	of	Padmasambhava.
29
	
Tib.	
srid	pa’i	sgo	zhes	bya	ba	khams	dang	thig	la	dkar	dmar	’gyu-ba’i	lam.
30
	
Tib.	
de-kho-na-nyid-kyi	dam-tshig-dang	sdom-pa
.	In	general,	all	the
commitments	of	the	Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality	and	all	vows	associated
with	
pious	attendants	and	bodhisattvas	may	be	termed	commitments	and	vows
taken	with	respect	to	the	nature	of	reality.	More	specifically,	however,	this	refers
to	the	four	commitments	taken	by	practitioners	of	the	Great	Perfection:
nothingness,	evenness,	uniqueness,	and	spontaneity,	on	which	see	R.	Barron
(trans.),	
The	Precious	Treasury	of	the	Way	of	Abiding
.
31
	
Tib.	
btags-grol
.	See	Ch.	14.
32
	
Tib.	
thos-grol
.	See	Ch.	11.
11	The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing

Part	One
1
	
Tib.	
Thos-grol	chen-mo
.
2
	
.	Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
Tib.	
khrid-kyi	rim-pa
.	This	refers	to	all	the	levels	of	instruction	received	during
the	course	of	a	person’s	lifetime,	including	those	based	on	the	sūtras	and	the
tantras.	The	experiential	cultivation	of	the	‘great	emptiness’	(
stong-pa	chen-po
)
which	the	practitioner	of	Mahāyoga	enters	into	in	the	course	of	daily	practice
brings	about	a	dissolution	of	normal	conceptual	consciousness	into	a	non-dual,
non-conceptual	awareness.	The	signs	which	accompany	the	successful
actualisation	of	this	meditative	process	are	identical	to	those	which	occur	at	the
time	of	death.	The	resulting	familiarity	with	the	process	of	the	dissolution	of
consciousness	allows	the	practitioner,	at	the	time	of	death,	to	pass	through	an
accustomed	process	and	thereby	to	enter	the	non-conceptual	inner	radiance
without	confusion	and	to	rest	in	its	nature,	with	stability.
4
	
See	above,	Ch.	10.
5
	
See	above,	Ch.	8.
6
	
Tib.	
bden-pa’i	stobs
.	This	refers	to	an	invocation	prayer	evoking	the	power	of
the	truth	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and	phenomena	embodied	in	the
meditational	deities,	the	sacred	writings,	and	the	community	of	sincere
practitioners.
7
	
This	esoteric	meditative	process,	which	is	divulged	only	to	fully	qualified
practitioners,	is	described	in	supplementary	texts	relating	to	the	present	cycle,
such	as	
Guiding	the	Deceased	to	Higher	Rebirths:	The	Natural	Liberation	of	the
Six	Realms	of	Beings
	(
Tshe-’das	gnas-’dren	’gro-drug	rang-grol
).	See	Appendix
One.
8
	
The	belief	in	the	notion	of	the	continuity	of	consciousness	creates	a	very
different	perspective	among	the	bereaved	within	Buddhist	communities.
Although	grief	is	not	repressed,	the	family	members	and	friends	are	encouraged
to	support	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased	by	being	themselves	strong	in	their
spiritual	practice	and	dedicating	this	effort	to	the	deceased.	Sympathy	for	the
spiritual	opportunities	being	presented	to	the	deceased	during	and	after	the	death

process	is	strongly	stressed.	Clinging,	attachment	and	extreme	sorrow	are
discouraged,	whilst	creating	an	atmosphere	of	openness,	compassion	and
acceptance	of	change	is	emphasised	and	highly	valued.
9
	
On	this	interval	following	the	cessation	of	outer	respiration	(
phyi-dbugs
)	and
preceding	the	cessation	of	inner	respiration	(
nang-dbugs
),	see	p.	228.
10
	
The	injunction	not	to	touch	the	body	of	the	deceased	extends	from	the
moment	
when	the	consciousness	enters	the	central	channel	until	the	vital	energy
leaves	the	body;	a	period	of	time	which	can	be	just	a	few	moments	or	up	to	three
days.	This	injunction	is	often	repeated	in	the	present	text	and	stressed	by	Tibetan
lamas	who	explain	that	touching	the	body	draws	the	mindfulness	of	the
individual	to	the	place	being	touched.	Since	the	point	on	the	body	from	which
the	consciousness	exits	is	related	to	the	quality	of	the	mental	realm	into	which	it
may	enter,	drawing	the	mindfulness	by	touching	can	be	helpful	or	harmful.	See
above,	Ch.	10,	p.	214.
11
	
Traditionally,	every	Tibetan	household	has	a	shrine	which	is	the	focus	of	the
household’s	daily	ritual	and	devotional	activity.	At	the	time	of	a	bereavement
various	ancillary	rituals	are	also	performed	together	with	the	reading	of	this
Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
.	Often	a	tent	is	erected	in	the	garden	and	a	large
altar	laid	out.	There	is	much	activity,	involving	both	the	family	and	the	attending
monks,	in	making	the	preparations	for	the	rituals.	The	sense	of	bewilderment	at
the	death	of	a	loved	one	is	strongly	tempered	by	the	purposefulness	in	the
activity	directed	at	supporting	and	inspiring	the	consciousness	of	the	deceased.
12
	
These	prayers	are	read	to	the	dying	person	in	order	to	inspire	a	calm	and
dignified	approach	to	death.	For	the	full	text	of	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	Calling
to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
	(
Sangs-rgyas-dang	byang-chub
sems-dpa’i-rnams-la	ra-mda’	sbran-pa’i	smon-lam
);	the	
Aspirational	Prayer
which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	’jigs-skyob-ma’i
smon-lam
),	and	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous
Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	’phrang-sgrol-gyi	smon-lam
),	see
Ch.	12;	and	for	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do’i	rtsa-
tshig
),	see	above,	Ch.	3.	The	attitude	in	which	the	dying	person	approaches	death
is	regarded	as	the	most	essential	factor	in	ensuring	the	continued	well-being	of
the	individual.	For	the	dying	individual	to	cultivate	an	attitude	of	compassion
towards	others	during	the	process	of	death	is	regarded	as	primary.	Remaining
fearless	and	fully	aware	of	the	processes	of	dying,	whilst	also	being	prepared	to

recognise	the	qualities	of	awareness	which	naturally	arise	during	and	after	the
moment	of	death,	is	strongly	encouraged.
13
	
Tib.	
’chi-kha’i	bar-do-la	’od-gsal	ngo-sprod-pa
.	This	is	the	introduction	to
the	radiance	which	arises	immediately	after	the	ceasing	of	respiration	at	the
moment	when	the	vital	energies	collect	at	the	mid-point	of	the	central	channel,
close	to	the	heart.	See	also	above,	Ch.	8,	pp.	173-7,	and	Ch.	10,	pp.	205-9,	where
reference	is	also	made	to	this	intermediate	state.
14
	
Tib.	chos-nyid	bar-do-la	’od-gsal	ngo-sprod-pa
.	This	is	the	introduction	to
the	radiance	experienced	by	the	mental	body	of	the	deceased	in	the	form	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities.	See	pp.	234-72;	also	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The
Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	77-102.
15
	
Tib.	
srid-pa	bar-do-la	mngal-sgo	dgag-thabs	bstan-pa
.	The	final	section	of
this	chapter	describes	five	profound	methods	for	avoiding	uncontrolled	rebirth	in
an	unfavourable	realm.	See	pp.	285-300;	also	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The
Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	105-28.
16
	
In	this	context,	the	advice	is	to	invite	to	the	bedside	an	individual	who	has
followed	the	same	meditational	practices	as	the	dying	person.
17
	
In	this	context,	the	advice	is	to	invite	to	the	bedside	an	individual	who	has
studied	and	practised	within	the	same	commentarial	tradition.
18
	
i.e.
	the	central	energy	channel	of	the	body.
19
	
This	period	during	which	vital	energy	and	consciousness	are	united	in	the
central	channel	is	also	described	as	that	in	which	the	‘inner	breath’	(
nang-dbugs
	
)
remains	within	the	body.	It	is	said	to	last	approximately	twenty	minutes.
20
	
Tib.	
bar-do	dang-po’i	’od-gsal
,	
i.e.
	the	inner	radiance	which	arises	at	the
culmination	of	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	is	the	first	of	three
successive	‘intermediate	states’	that	occur	after	death	and	prior	to	the	rebirth
process.	They	comprise	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground,	the	inner	radiance	of
the	path,	and	the	inner	radiance	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	in	the
intermediate	state	of	reality.	These	three	phases	are	not	to	be	confused	with	the
classical	enumeration	of	the	six	intermediate	states	as	described	in	Ch.	3	and	in
the	glossary.
21
	
Throughout	the	death	process	and	at	each	step	in	the	reading	of	the	
Great
Liberation	by	Hearing
,	the	presiding	lama	should	enter	into	those	meditative

states	of	awareness	which	the	text	describes	and	which	the	dying	person	is
encouraged	to	cultivate.	In	this	way,	he	serves	as	a	support	and	anchor	for	the
concentration	of	the	dying	and	the	deceased.
22
	
Tib.	
rtsa	rba-rlabs	rtsis-ba
.	Tibetan	medicine	describes	diverse	types	of	pulse
which	indicate	impending	death	due	to	humoral	imbalance,	visceral	failure	and
so	forth.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	p.	137.	On	the	procedures	followed	in
pulse	palpation,	see	ibid.,	p.	123.
23
	
Tib.	
gnyid-log	rtsa-gnyis
.	The	two	carotid	arteries	‘which	induce
unconsciousness	when	pressed’,	are	included	among	the	body’s	most	vulnerable
points.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	33,	43.	Pressure	applied	at	the	right
moment	is	said	to	trap	the	vital	energy	and	mind	together	in	the	central	channel,
with	no	possibility	of	regression	or	reversal.	Correct	training	in	this	procedure	is
of	crucial	importance,	and	it	is	obviously	essential	that	the	carotids	are	not
pressed	until	after	the	pulse	has	ceased.
24
	
On	the	crown	or	anterior	fontanelle	(Tib.	
tshangs-bug
;	Skt.	
brahmarandhra
),
which	is	the	optimum	point	of	exit	for	the	consciousness	of	the	dying	individual,
see	Ch.	10,	p.	214.
25
	
The	period	following	the	cessation	of	the	coarse	outer	breath	(
phyi-dbugs
)
and	before	the	cessation	of	the	subtle	inner	breath	(
nang-dbugs
),	also	known	as
the	life-sustaining	vital	energy	(Tib.	
srog-’dzin-gyi	rlung
;	Skt.	
prāṇa
),	is	that
during	which	the	vital	energy	and	mind	are	drawn	together	into	the	central
channel,	causing	ordinary	beings	to	lapse	into	unconsciousness	(
shes-pa	brgyal
).
This	moment	is	also	described	in	terms	of	the	blackness	induced	by	the	merging
of	the	white	male	and	red	female	generative	essences	at	the	heart-centre	of	the
central	channel.	See	Ch.	8,	p.	175.
26
	
The	Tibetan	biographical	tradition	cites	many	instances	of	great	spiritual
teachers	who	at	the	time	of	their	demise	enter	into	the	prolonged	experience	of
this	intermediate	state.
27
	
See	Ch.	10,	p.	203.
28
	
See	Ch.	8,	p.	173ff.	An	alternative	description	of	this	process	is	also	given	in
medical	texts.	See	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	pp.	51-2:	‘Upon	the	sinking	of	the
earth	element	into	the	water	element,	the	patient	ceases	to	grasp	the	solidity	of
objects.	Upon	the	sinking	of	the	water	element	into	the	fire	element,	the	sensory
orifices	dry	up.	Upon	the	sinking	of	the	fire	element	into	the	wind	
element,

bodily	heat	disappears.	Upon	the	sinking	of	the	wind	element	into	the	space
element,	breathing	stops.	As	far	as	the	five	sensory	organs,	born	out	of	the	five
primordial	elements,	are	concerned,	the	first	to	cease	functioning	is	sight,	then
comes	the	ability	to	hear,	followed	by	the	senses	of	smell,	taste	and	finally	touch.
Consequent	on	this	tactile	loss,	life	itself	wanes;	and	all	sensory	functions
dissolve	into	the	life-sustaining	breath,	which	itself	vanishes	into	consciousness,
destined	for	future	rebirth.’
29
	
On	the	relationship	between	the	various	orifices	from	which	serum	is	exuded
and	the	realms	inhabited	by	sentient	beings,	see	Ch.	10,	p.	214;	also	A.	Wayman,
The	Buddhist	Tantras
,	Ch.	12,	pp.	139-50,	whose	account	is	based	on	the
commentarial	literature	of	the	
Guhyasamāja	Tantra
.
30
	
The	harsh	and	bewildering	experiences	related	to	past	actions	(
las-kyi	’khrul-
snang
	
)	are	those	manifestations	of	sound,	lights	and	rays	of	light	which	appear
during	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	(
chos-nyid	bar-do
),	in	contrast	to	the
terrifying	experiences	related	to	Yama	(
gshin-rje
)	which	occur	during	the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth	(
srid-pa’i	bar-do
).	See	p.	234ff	and	pp.	268-9.
31
	
Since	the	meditational	deities	are	pure	appearances	inseparable	from
emptiness,	they	are	said	to	‘appear	and	yet	lack	inherent	existence’	(
snang-la
rang-bzhin	med-pa
)	and	to	be	‘devoid	of	solid	or	corporeal	forms’	(
gdos-bcas
med-pa
).	See	also	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	123-7,	279-80;	Longchen
Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	626-81.
32
	
i.e.
	Avalokiteśvara.
33
	
On	the	risk	of	inferior	rebirth	(
ngan-song
)	which	confronts	those	who	have
broken	their	vows	(
sdom-pa	shor-ba
)	and	failed	to	maintain	their	basic
commitments	(
rtsa-ba’i	dam-tshig	nyams
),	see	Ch.	7;	also	Longchen	Rabjampa,
GGFTC,	pp.	1184-229.
34
	
On	this	convergence	of	the	mother	and	child	aspects	of	reality	(
chos-nyidma-
bu
	
),	which	are	identified	respectively	with	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	and
the	inner	radiance	of	the	path,	the	latter	cultivated	by	the	meditator	during	his	or
her	lifetime,	see	also	Ch.	8,	pp.	176-7.
35
	
The	experiences	of	the	‘mental	body’	(
yid-kyi	lus
)	during	the	intermediate
states	of	reality	and	rebirth	are	described	below	in	detail.	See	pp.	273-85.
36
	
The	intermediate	state	of	reality	is	here	referred	to	as	the	‘third	intermediate
state’	(
bar-do	gsum-pa
)	when	it	is	enumerated	following	the	two	phases	of	inner

radiance	of	the	ground	and	path	that	arise	during	the	intermediate	state	of	the
time	of	death	(
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
).
37
	
Tib.	
Chos-nyid	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	chen-mo
.
38
	
For	a	synopsis	of	the	classical	enumeration	of	the	six	categories	of
intermediate	state:	namely	the	intermediate	state	of	the	living	or	natural
existence	(
rang-bzhin	skye-gnas-kyi	bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	dreams
(
rmi-lam	bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	meditative	stability	(
ting-nge-’dzin
bsam-gtan-gyi	bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	(
’chi-kha’i
bar-do
);	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	(
chos-nyid	bar-do
);	and	the	intermediate
state	of	consequent	rebirth	(
lugs-’byung	srid-pa’i	bar-do
),	see	glossary.	Tsele
Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	pp.	75-102,	also	discusses	the
diverse	interpretations	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	presented	by	the
different	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.
39
	
As	stated	above,	p.	229,	the	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	is	said	to
last	up	to	three	and	a	half	days,	so	that	those	who	have	failed	to	recognise	the
inner	radiances	of	the	ground	and	path	remain	unconscious	for	the	same	period
of	time.	It	is	on	being	aroused	from	that	unconscious	state	that	the	visions	of	the
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	of	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	then	arise.	It	is
important	to	bear	in	mind	that	the	use	of	the	word	‘day’	in	this	context	and	those
which	follow	is	from	the	standpoint	of	the	bereaved.	From	the	perspective	of	the
deceased,	as	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdol	states,	‘Few	people,	however,	consider	these
to	be	actual	solar	days.	Since	they	are	.	.	.	only	meditation	days,	understand	that
for	ordinary	people	they	do	not	appear	for	more	than	a	short	moment’	(
Mirror	of
Mindfulness
,	p.	113).
40
	
On	the	reversal	of	cyclic	existence	and	of	all	its	aspects	of	mundane
consciousness	and	sense-perception	through	the	practices	of	the	Great
Perfection,	see	NSTB,	p.	340,	and	GGFTC,	pp.	395-97,	1001-5.
41
	
The	events	which	unfold	in	the	course	of	the	intermediate	states	of	reality	and
rebirth	are	held,	in	the	view	of	the	present	text,	to	endure	approximately	for
forty-nine	days.	Note	however	that	this	period	of	forty-nine	days	is	not	said	to	be
fixed.	See	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	22.	It	is
recognised	that	the	nature	of	the	appearances	in	the	intermediate	state	of	reality
will	vary	according	to	the	meditative	tradition	followed.	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol
(ibid.,	pp.	98-100)	does	emphasise,	on	the	other	hand,	that	the	pure	psycho-
physical	aggregates,	elements,	sense-organs,	and	so	forth,	will	manifest	as

sounds,	lights	and	rays.
42
	
Tib.	
dbus-su	thig-le	brdal-ba’i	zhing-khams
.	An	epithet	of	the	Akaniṣṭha-
Ghanavyūha	realm	of	Vairocana	Buddha,	on	which	see	glossary.
43
	
Tib.	
de-bzhin	gshegs-pa’i	’od-zer	chos-dbyings-kyi	ye-shes	zhes-bya-ba
.	This
luminosity	is	called	the	‘light	ray	of	the	Tathāgata’	because	Vairocana	Buddha	is
said	to	preside	over	the	Tathāgata	or	Buddha	family.	On	the	compassionate
unfolding	of	the	great	light	rays	of	the	tathāgatas,	see	also	Dudjom	Rinpoche,
NSTB,	pp.	912-13.
44
	
Note	that	the	text	associates	both	the	dull	white	light	of	the	god-realms	and
the	dull	green	light	of	the	animal	realms	(see	p.	253)	with	the	propensities	for
delusion	(
gti-mug
).	More	generally,	delusion	is	recognised	as	the	primary
dissonant	mental	state	giving	rise	to	birth	among	the	animals,	and	pride	as	the
primary	dissonant	mental	state	giving	rise	to	birth	among	the	gods.
45
	
Note	that	pride	is	more	generally	associated	with	birth	in	the	god	realms,
while	it	is	attachment	(
’dod-chags
)	or	a	combination	of	all	five	dissonant	mental
states	that	is	said	to	generate	birth	as	a	human	being.	See	above,	Ch.	5.
46
	
On	the	significance	in	Atiyoga	of	the	‘state	of	non-activity’	(
byar-med-kyi
ngang
),	see	above	Ch.	4;	also	NSTB,	pp.	335-7,	896-910.
47
	
Tib.	
ye-shes	bzhi-sbyor-gyi	snang-ba
.
48
	
This	passage	associates	the	white	luminosity	with	the	pristine	cognition	of
reality’s	expanse	and	Vairocana,	and	the	blue	light	with	the	mirror-like	pristine
cognition	and	Akṣobhya,	reversing	the	earlier	sequence.	On	this	distinction,	see
Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	390-91.
49
	
DR,	Vol.	3,	p.	77,	1.	3,	reads	
nang-du
.
50
	
Tib.	
mi-rtog-pa’i	ngang.
	Along	with	bliss	and	radiance,	this	‘non-conceptual
state’	is	considered	to	be	one	of	the	three	concomitant	experiences	associated
with	the	practice	of	the	perfection	stage	(
sampannakrama
).	See	Longchen
Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	827-8.
51
	
The	green	light	associated	with	Amoghasiddhi	is	said	not	to	arise	until
buddha-activities	can	be	performed	consequent	on	the	attainment	of	perfect
enlightenment.
52
	
This	‘vision	of	the	four	pristine	cognitions	combined’	(
ye-shes	bzhi-sbyor-gyi

snang-ba
)	is	said	to	occur	in	relation	to	the	‘hollow	passageway	of	Vajrasattva’
(
rdo-rje	sems-dpa’	khong-gseng-gi	lam
),	a	synonym	for	the	central	channel	of
the	body,	through	which	transference	of	consciousness	(
’pho-ba
)	is	also	effected.
See	Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
The	Mirror	of	Mindfulness
,	p.	20.
53
	
Tib.	
rgyun-gyi	ting-nge-’dzin
;	Skt.	
sroto’nugatasamādhi
.
54
	
Tib.	
rig-pa	lhun-grub	chen-po’i	sku
.	See	glossary	under	Buddha-body.
55
	
On	the	conflation	in	this	text	of	delusion	(Skt.	
moha
;	Tib.	
gti-mug
)	with	both
the	god-realm	and	the	animal	realm,	see	note	44.
56
	
On	this	class	of	faithful	retainers	(Tib.	
ging
),	who	protect	the	maṇḍala	from
impediments,	see	also	Ch.	7,	note	17.

Part	Two
1
	
Tib.	
Khro-bo’i	bar-do’i	’char-tshul	bstan-pa	bzhugs-so
.
2
	
See	Ch.	14.
3
	
There	are	many	specific	instances	of	these	indications	symbolic	of	passage	to
the	realm	of	the	sky-farers	(
dag-pa	mkha’-spyod
)	at	the	time	of	death,
particularly	in	the	context	of	the	lineages	of	Atiyoga.	See,	for	example,	NSTB,	p.
543	(the	death	of	Bagom),	p.	550	(the	death	of	Dzeng	Dharmabodhi),	p.	561	(the
death	of	Zhangton),	p.	563	(the	death	of	Nyibum),	p.	564	(the	death	of	Guru
Jober),	p.	568	(the	death	of	Melong	Dorje),	p.	572	(the	death	of	Kumārādza),	and
p.	594	(the	death	of	Longchenpa).	For	a	more	detailed	explanation	of	these
phenomena,	see	Ch.	14,	
passim
.
4
	
Tib.	
gsang-lam
,	
i.e.
	the	path	of	the	secret	mantras	(
guhyamantra
).
5
	
The	full	text	of	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-
physical	Aggregates
	(
bTags-grol	phung-po	rang-grol
)	is	contained	below,	Ch.
14,	pp.	347-79.
6
	
The	names	of	the	four	Female	Gatekeepers	of	the	wrathful	assembly	given
here	are	identical	to	those	given	above,	p.	247,	in	the	context	of	the	peaceful
assembly.	Their	actual	names	are	Vajratejas
ῑ
	in	the	east,	Vajrāmoghā	in	the	south,
Vajralokā	in	the	west,	and	Vajravetāl
ῑ
	in	the	north,	See,	above,	Ch.	5,	p.	84.
7
	
The	colours	of	Manurākṣas
ῑ
,	Brahmāṇ
ῑ
,	Raudr
ῑ
,	Vaiṣṇāv
ῑ
,	and	Kaumār
ῑ
	here
accord	with	the	descriptions	in	Ch.	5,	p.	85,	and	Ch.	6,	p.	110.	DR,	p.	103,
depicts	them	respectively	as	dark	brown,	reddish	yellow,	dark	green,	blue,	and
red.
8
	
DR,	p.	103,	1.4,	reads	
phag-mgo
	(pig-headed),	but	see	Ch.	5,	p.	85,	and	Ch.	6,
p.	110.
9
	
Here	the	colours	of	Sānt
ῑ
,	Amrtā,	Saum
ῑ
,	and	Dand
ῑ
	accord	with	the
descriptions	in	Ch.	5,	p.	85,	and	Ch.	6,	p.	110.	DR,	p.	103,	depicts	them
respectively	as	red,	red,	white,	and	dark	green.
10
	
Here	the	colours	of	Bhakṣas
ῑ
	and	Rudhiramad
ῑ
	accord	with	the	descriptions	in
Ch.	5,	p.	86,	and	Ch.	6,	pp.	110-11.	DR,	p.	104,	depicts	them	respectively	as	dark

green	and	white.
11
	
Here	the	colours	of	Vāyudev
ῑ
,	Agnāy
ῑ
,	Varāh
ῑ
,	Vajrā	Cāmuṇḍ
ῑ
,	and	Varunāṇ
ῑ
accord	with	the	descriptions	in	Ch.	5,	p.	86,	and	Ch.	6,	p.	111.	DR,	pp.	104-5,
describes	them	respectively	as	blue,	red,	black,	red,	and	blue.
12
	
On	this	distinction,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	397ff.,	and	ibid.,
Ch.	15,	pp.	1075ff.
13
	
On	the	variations	in	the	size	of	the	buddha-body,	see	R.	Kloetsli,	
Buddhist
Cosmology
,	p.	69,	and	on	the	varying	sizes	of	the	physical	bodies	of	living
beings	within	the	three	world-systems,	see	the	chart	in	ibid.,	p.	38.	The	same
work	has	much	information	on	the	dimensions	of	Mount	Sumeru	and	its	status
within	the	world-system.
14
	
Mistaken	views	(
log-lta
)	are	principally	those	which	disclaim	an	appropriate
connection	between	virtuous	causes	and	virtuous	effects,	and	those	which
ascribe	inherent	existence	in	varying	degrees	to	physical	and	mental	phenomena.

Part	Three
1
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol	las	srid-pa	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod
.
2
	
.	Tib.	
Sangs-rgyas-dang	byang-chub	sems-dpa’i-rnams-la	ra-mda’	sbran-pa’i
smon-lam
.	See	Ch.	12,	pp.	308-9.
3
	
These	verses	are	found	in	Vasubandhu’s	
Treasury	of	the	Abhidharma
,	Ch.	3,
vv.	13-14.
4
	
Tib.	
sngon-’byung
.
5
	
Tib.	
bar-do’i	snang-ba	yid-kyi	lus
.
6
	
Tib.	
dbang-po	kun-tshang	thogs-med	rgyu
.
7
	
Vajrāsana,	the	‘indestructible	seat’	below	the	Bodhi	Tree	at	present-day	Bodh
Gaya,	the	place	where	the	buddhas	of	the	‘auspicious	aeon’	are	said	to	attain
buddhahood.
8
	
Tib.	
las-kyi	rdzu-’phrul	shugs-dang	ldan
.
9
	
The	miraculous	ability	based	on	past	actions	(
las-kyi	rdzu-’phrul
	)	is	an
intensified	perceptual	state	arising	from	past	habitual	tendencies	(
vāsanā
),	quite
distinct	from	the	four	supports	for	miraculous	ability	(
ṛddhipāda
)	or	enlightened
attributes	(
guṇa
)	indicative	of	buddhahood,	on	which	see	NSTB,	Vol.	2,	p.	138.
10
	
Tib.	
rigs-mthun	lha-mig	dag-pas	mthong
.
11
	
This	‘pure	clairvoyance’	(
lha-mig	dag-pa
),	like	the	miraculous	ability	based
on	past	actions	(
las-kyi	rdzu-’phrul
	)	described	above,	is	a	product	of	the
intensified	perception	of	the	mental	body,	enabling	those	destined	to	one	form	of
rebirth	to	perceive	beings	of	their	own	kind.	As	such,	it	is	differentiated	from	the
clairvoyance	possessed	by	the	gods	inhabiting	the	world-systems	of	form
(
rūpadhātu
)	and	desire	(
kāmadhātu
),	but	similar	to	that	which	is	acquired	in	the
course	of	meditation.
12
	
The	carnivorous	ogres	(Tib.	
srin-po
),	acting	as	the	executors	of	the	unfailing
law	of	cause	and	effect	(
las-kyi	sha-za
),	are	those	who	execute	the	rites	of	Yama
(
gshin-rje’i	las
).	See	Ch.	13,	pp.	321ff.
13
	
The	colours	of	the	three	precipices	symbolic	of	the	dissonant	mental	states

(
kleśa
)	-	white,	red,	and	black	-	are	also	respectively	associated	with	the	three
enlightened	families	(
rigs-gsum
)	through	which	they	are	purified,	
i.e.
	those	of
Akṣobhya,	who	is	the	natural	purity	of	aversion,	Amitābha,	who	is	the	natural
purity	of	attachment,	and	Vairocana,	who	is	the	natural	purity	of	delusion.	See
Ch.	5,	p.	97.
14
	
This	sentence	is	omitted	in	DR,	Vol.	3,	f.	125,	l.	1.
15
	
On	the	expression	
lhan-cig	skyes-pa’i	lha
,	here	rendered	as	‘innate	good
conscience’,	and	the	expression	
lhan-cig	skyes-pa’i	’dre
,	rendered	here	as	‘innate
bad	conscience’	see	also	Ch.	13,	pp.	321ff.
16
	
On	the	‘mirror	of	past	actions’	(
las-kyi	me-long
)	in	which	Yama	Dharmarāja
is	said	to	view	the	virtuous	and	non-virtuous	actions	of	the	deceased,	see	below,
Ch.	13,	pp.	321-2.
17
	
The	‘bull-headed	Rakṣa’	(
rag-sha	glang-mgo
)	is	the	name	of	one	of	the
acolytes	of	Yama	Dharmarāja.	See	Ch.	13,	pp.	321ff.
18
	
See	glossary.	For	the	Nyingma	interpretation	of	the	Buddha-body	of
Essentiality	(
ngo-bo-nyid-kyi	sku
;	Skt.	
svabhāvikakāya
),	which	some	sources
regard	as	the	‘fourth’	buddha-body,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	191ff.
19
	
On	the	significance	of	the	‘name	empowerment’	(
ming-gi	dbang
),	see
glossary	under	Four	Empowerments.
20
	
The	following	verses	derive	from	the	
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects
from	Fear	of	the	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do’i	’jigs-skyobs	smon-lam
).	See
below,	Ch.	12,	pp.	314−15.
21
	
Those	experiencing	the	sensation	of	moving	upwards	(
gyen-la	’gro-ba
)	have
an	affinity	with	rebirth	in	the	god-realms,	those	moving	horizontally	(
’phred-la
’gro-ba
)	have	an	affinity	with	the	human	realms,	while	those	moving	downwards
(
mgo	mthur-la	brten-nas	’gro-ba
)	have	an	affinity	with	the	hells,	anguished
spirits	and	animals.	See	
e.g.
	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	493−4.
22
	
On	these	verses	from	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do
drug-gi	rtsa-tshig
),	see	Ch.	3,	pp.	33−4.
23
	
Tib.	
bdag	srid-pa	bar-do	’char-dus	’dir
.
24
	
Tib.	
mdun-pa	rtse-gcig	sems-la	bzung-bya
.
25
	
Tib.	
bzang-po	las-kyi	’phro-la	nan-gyis	mthud
.

26
	
Tib.	
mngal-sgo	bkag-nas	ru-log	dran-par	bya/	snying-rus	dag-snang	dgos-
pa’i	dus	gcig	yin
.
27
	
Tib.	
bla-ma	yab-yum
.
28
	
On	the	practices	pertaining	to	the	purification	of	the	four	modes	of	birth
(
skye-gnas	rigs	bzhi
;	Skt.	
caturyoni
),	namely:	oviparous	birth	(
sgo-nga-nas	skye-
ba
;	Skt.	
aṇḍaja
),	viviparous	birth	(
mngal-nas	skye-ba
;	Skt.	
jārāyuja
),
supernormal	birth	(
brdzus-te	skye-ba
;	Skt.	
upapāduka
),	and	birth	from	warmth
and	moisture	(
drod-sher-las	skye-ba
;	Skt.	
saṃsvedaja
),	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,
NSTB,	p.	279.	Note	that	the	instructions	given	in	our	text	at	this	juncture	refer
only	to	the	first	two	categories.
29
	
The	clotting	of	the	embryo	(
nur-nur-po
;	Skt.	
kalala
)	and	the	oval	formation
of	the	embryo	(
mer-mer-po
;	Skt.	
arbuda
)	are	the	first	two	of	the	so-called	five
stages	of	embryonic	development	(
mngal-gyi	gnas-skabs	lnga
).	For	a	more
detailed,	though	slightly	different,	explanation,	see	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,
pp.	25−6	and	181−2.
30
	
See	Ch.	3,	p.	34.
31
	
Tib.	
bden-med	sgyu-ma	lta-bu	gdams-ngag.
32
	
Tib.	
’od-gsal	sgoms-nas	mngal-sgo	’gag
.
33
	
On	this	description	of	the	mind	resting	in	its	natural	state,	which	derives	from
the	esoteric	instructions	of	the	Great	Perfection	on	Cutting	through	Resistance
(
rdzogs-chen	khregs-chod
),	see	Ch.	4.
34
	
Tib.	
mngal-sgo	’dam-pa’i	gdams-ngag	zab-mo
.
35
	
On	the	meditative	stabilities	(
samādhi
)	or	meditative	concentrations	(
dhyāna
)
which	give	rise	to	birth	in	the	world-system	of	form	(
rūpadhātu
),	see	the	chart	in
NSTB,	pp.	14−15;	and	for	a	detailed	discussion,	see	also	L.	Pruden	(trans.),
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyaṃ
,	Ch.	3,	The	World,	pp.	365-495.
36
	
On	the	transference	of	consciousness	to	the	pure	buddha	fields	(
dag-pa
sangs-rgyas-kyi	zhing-du	’pho-ba
),	see	Ch.	10.
37
	
For	a	description	of	such	consecration	of	the	womb,	see	the	life	of	Śākyamuni
Buddha	in	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	p.	416;	also	GGFTC,	p.	474.
38
	
Sangs-rgyas-dang	byang-chub	sems-dpa-rnams-la	ra-mdar	spran-pa’i	smon-
lam
	
.	See	below,	Ch.	12,	pp.	308-9.

39
	
For	the	text	of	the	
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
	(
Bar-do	drug-gi
rtsa-tshig
),	see	above,	Ch.	3,	pp.	32-4;	and	for	that	of	the	
Aspirational	Prayer
which	Rescues	from	the	Dangerous	Pathways	of	the	Intermediate	States
	
(
Bar-do
’phrang-sgrol-gyi	smon-lam
),	see	below,	Ch.	12,	pp.	310-13.
40
	
For	the	full	text	of	the	
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	Psycho-
physical	Aggregates
	(
bTags-grol	phung-po	rang-grol
),	see	below,	Ch.	14;	and	for
that	of	the	
Spiritual	Practice:	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
	
(
Chos-
spyod	bag-chags	rang-grol
),	see	above,	Ch.	5.
12	Aspirational	Prayers
1
	
Tib.	
Sangs-rgyas-dang	byang-chub	sems-dpa’	rnams-la	ra-mdar	spran-pa’i
smon-lam
.
2
	
Or	she,	as	appropriate.
3
	
Tib.	
Bar-do	’phrang-sgrol-gyi	smon-lam
.
4
	
DR,	pp.	320-21,	inserts	these	verses	after	those	dedicated	to	Amoghasiddhi.
5
	
This	mantra,	missing	in	DR,	p.	321,	l.	2,	is	inserted	on	the	basis	of	its	inclusion
in	the	Delhi	and	Varanasi	reprints.
6
	
Tib.	
Bar-do’i	smon-lam	’jigs-skyobs-ma
.
7
	
At	this	point	the	text	inserts	the	following	couplet,	which	has	apparently	been
mis-transcribed	out	of	context	from	the	previous	aspirational	prayer:
May	the	fields	of	the	five	elements	not	rise	up	as	a	hostile	force.	May	I	see	them
as	the	fields	of	the	five	buddhas.
8
	
An	allusion	to	the	beguiling	prophecies	of	Māra,	who	sought	to	deceive
Śākyamuni	at	the	time	of	his	attainment	of	buddhahood.
13	A	Masked	Drama

Part	One
1
	
Tib.	
Srid-pa	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	dge-sdig	rang-gzugs	ston-pa’i	gdams-pa	srid-
pa	bar-do	rang-grol.
	On	the	variant	forms	of	the	title,	see	Appendix	One.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
Tib.	
Padma	zhi-khro’i	bar-do	thos-grol.
	On	the	cycles	of	
gter-ma
	discovered
by	Karma	Lingpa,	and	the	various	texts	concerning	empowerment	(
dbang-bskur
)	and	introduction	(
ngo-sprod
)	contained	within	them,	see	above,	‘A	Brief
Literary	History’,	pp.	xxxvi-xlviii,	and	Appendix	One.
4
	
Here,	the	intermediate	state	of	reality	(
chos-nyid	bar-do
)	is	described	as	such
because	the	luminosities	and	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	are	directly	seen,
offering	the	potential	for	immediate	liberation.
5
	
Although	the	introduction	to	the	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	(
srid-pa’i	bar-do
)
has	already	been	given	(see	Ch.	11,	pp.	273-303),	the	drama	presented	here
functions	as	a	light-hearted	didactic	supplement	to	the	previous	introduction,	and
is	directed	specifically	at	the	living	rather	than	the	deceased.
6
	
The	acolytes	of	Yama	include	the	Ox-headed	Rakṣa	Demon	(
Rakṣa	glang-
mgo
).
7
	
Tib.	
‘Byung-po	spre’u	mgo.
8
	
The	
bre
	is	the	standard	Tibetan	unit	of	dry	measure,	twenty	of	which	equal	one
khal
.	The	
srang
	is	the	standard	unit	of	weight	measurement.
9
	
Tib.	
Dur	phag-mgo.
10
	
Tib.	
sDug-pa	sbrul-mgo.
11
	
Tib.	
gTum-po	dom-mgo.
12
	
Tib.	
srNgam-pa	seng-mgo.
13
	
Tib.	
’Dab-chags	khyung-mgo.
14
	
Tib.	
lhan-cig	skyes-pa’i	lha.
	See	also	Ch.	11,	p.	279.
15
	
Tib.	
lhan-gcig	skyes-pa’i	’dre.
	See	also	Ch.	11,	p.	279.
16
	
Tib.	
dPal-skyes.

17
	
Tib.	
dMyal-ba	’bum
.
18
	
On	the	outcaste	(
caṇḍāla
;	Tib.	
rigs-ngan	gdol-pa
)	community,	traditionally
excluded	from	Indian	society	for	occupational	reasons,	see	A.	L.	Basham,	
The
Wonder	That	Was	India
,	pp.	145-7.
19
	
The	four	classes	of	ancient	Indian	society	comprise:	the	priestly	class
(
brāhmaṇavarṇa
	
);	the	princely	class	(
kṣatriyavarṇa
);	the	mercantile	class
(
vaiśyavarṇa
	
);	and	the	labouring	class	(
śūdravarṇa
).	See	A.	L.	Basham,	
The
Wonder	That	Was	India
,	pp.	138-4	5.
20
	
On	the	currency	of	such	materialistic	and	nihilistic	philosophical	views	in
ancient	India,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	66-7;	and	see	A.	L.	Basham,
The	Wonder	That	Was	India
,	pp.	298-300.
21
	
Tāmralipti	(
zangs-gling
)	is	identified	with	modern	Tamluk	on	the	Bengal
coast.	See	NSTB,	p.	455.
22
	
Tib.	
shan-pa	khri-dpon
;	also	translatable	as	‘myriarch	of	butchers’.
23
	
Tib.	
shan-mo	dpal-skyid
.
24
	
The	year	of	the	water	pig	is	the	last	in	the	cycle	of	sixty	years,	according	to
the	calendrical	system	of	elemental	divination	(
’byung-rtsis
),	for	which	reason	it
will	create	a	‘fin	de	siècle’	notion	in	the	minds	of	the	audience.
25
	
Kāmarūpa	in	Assam	is	revered	as	one	of	the	twenty-four	sacred	abodes	of
tantric	Buddhist	India.	See	NSTB,	pp.	472	and	501.
26
	
Tib.	
rje-rigs
;	Skt.	
vaiśya
.	See	above,	note	19.
27
	
Tib.	
rDo-rje	gcod-pa
	(
Vajracchedikā
,	T	16).	This	sūtra	is	one	of	the	best
known	of	the	shorter	
Prajñāpāramitā
	texts.	Its	Chinese	version	is	said	to	be	the
world’s	oldest	extant	printed	book.
28
	
See	Ch.	12,	pp.	308-9.
29
	
See	Ch.	11,	pp.	285-300.
30
	
See	Ch.	10.
31
	
See	glossary	under	Six-syllable	Mantra.
32
	
Tib.	
dGe-sdig	rang-gzugs	ston-pa’i	gdams-pa	[’am	me-long]	srid-pa	[bar-
do]	rang-grol.

33
	
Skt.	
śubhaṃ	bhavantu.

Part	Two
1
	
Tib.	
Srid-pa’i	bar-do’i	ngo-sprod	dge-sdig	rang-gzugs	ston-pa’i	lhan-thabs
dbyangs-snyan	lha’i	gaṇḍ
ῑ.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol.
3
	
See	pp.	326-8.
4
	
The	maṇḍala	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	would	be	constructed	in	two
or	three	dimensions	for	the	performance	of	this	drama	and	the	concomitant
empowerment	ceremonies.
5
	
See	p.	333.
6
	
On	the	significance	of	the	‘maṇḍala	of	spiralling	rainbow	lights’	(Tib.	
’ja’-’od
’khyil-ba’i	dkyil-’khor
)	for	practitioners	of	the	All-surpassing	Realisation	(
thod-
rgal
)	meditations	of	Atiyoga,	see	Dudjom	Rinpoche,	NSTB,	pp.	337-43.
7
	
i.e.
	Namka	Chokyi	Gyelpo,	the	spiritual	teacher	of	Gyarawa	Namka	Chokyi
Gyatso,	who	composed	this	supplement.
8
	
See	Ch.	5,	pp.	67ff.
9
	
Tib.	
zang-thal
.	This	expression	indicates	success	in	consciousness-transference
or	the	direct	realisation	of	inner	radiance	at	death.	See	above,	Ch.	10.
14	Liberation	by	Wearing
1
	
Tib.	
bTags-grol	phung-po	rang-grol-gyi	don-bsdus
.
2
	
Tib.	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
.
3
	
OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	are	the	essential	mantras	which	liberate	mundane	body,	speech,
and	mind	in	primordial	purity.
4
	
This	is	the	naturally	resonant	mantra	of	the	Buddha	Samantabhadra,	written	in
the	ḍākiṇ
ῑ
	script	of	Oḍḍiyāna,	in	the	form	of	a	vajra-song.	The	ḍākiṇ
ῑ
	script
appears	to	be	only	remotely	related	to	Sanskrit.	The	following	interpretation	of
these	syllables	derives	from	the	
Tantra	of	the	Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
(
Nyi-zla	kha-sbyor-gyi	rgyud
,	sDe-dge	NGB,	Vol.	4,	p.	119a).	For	variant

readings	of	the	mantras,	see	also	Namkhai	Norbu,	
The	Dzogchen	Ritual
Practices
,	pp.	132-6;	and	for	its	intonation,	ibid.,	pp.	90-1.	Following	the	tantra,
the	syllables	are	interpreted	by	Namkhai	Norbu	as	follows:	From	the	very
beginning	(EMA),	intrinsic	awareness	has	never	been	born,	nor	will	it	ever	be
born	(KIRI	KIRI).	Self-arisen,	it	has	never	been	interrupted	MAṢTA),	nor	will	it
ever	be	interrupted	(BHALIBHALI).	Since	it	is	total	vision,	it	has	never	been
clarified,	nor	will	it	ever	be	clarified	(SAMITASURUSURU).	Being
omnipresent,	it	has	never	been	constructed,	nor	will	it	ever	be	constructed
(KUNDHALIMASUMASU).	Being	unique	it	is	perfectly	realised	in	space
through	the	methods	of	the	four	signs	(EKARILISUBHASTAYE).	It	is	natural
liberation	into	the	great	expanse	and	it	is	supreme	bliss	(CAKIRABHULITA).
Since	it	is	the	great	expanse,	it	is	habituated	to	supreme	delight
(CAYESAMUNTA	CARYASUGHAYE).	Relaxing	the	tension	of	this	portion,
which	is	relative	existence,	intrinsic	awareness	generates	everything
(BHITISANABHYAGHULIYE).	And	thus	one	transfers	directly	into	the	great
inner	radiance	(SAKARIDHUKANI).	Brilliant	and	wondrous,	this	light	radiates
(MATARIBHETANA),	totally	transcending	everything,	and	it	eliminates	all
errors	(PARALIHISANA).	In	a	state	of	being	just	as	it	is,	it	is	free	from	all
conceptions	(MAKHARTEKELANA).	Being	perfect,	it	is	like	the	light	of	the
moon	(SAMBHURATA	MAIKACARATAMBA).	Like	the	sunlight,	it	is
luminous	(SURYAGHATARAYE	BASHANA).	It	is	like	a	jewel,	a	mountain,	a
many-petalled	lotus	(RANABHITI	SAGHUTIPAYA).	It	is	the	great	resonance
which	has	never	been	sounded,	and	never	will	be	sounded
(GHURAGHURAPAGAKHARANALAM).	It	is	the	primordial	state	which	has
never	been	created	and	never	will	be	created	(NARANARAYI
THARAPAṬLAṂ).	It	is	the	great	enlightened	mind	which	was	never	adorned
and	never	will	be	adorned	(SIRNASIRNABHESARASPALAṂ).	Self-originated
and	perfect,	it	will	never	become	enlightened	(BUDDHABUDDHA
CHIŚASAGHELAṂ).	Ten	concluding	syllables	are	focal	points	of	bodily
energy	(SASĀ	ṚṜ	ḶḸ	IĪ	MAMĀ),	while	the	other	concluding	syllables	are
associated	with	the	buddha-bodies	(RARĀ	LAHA	Ā).
5
	
This	mantra	in	the	form	of	a	vajra-song	is	included	in	the	
Tantra	of	the
Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
	(
Nyi-zla	kha-sbyor-gyi	rgyud
,	sDe-dge	NGB,	Vol.
4,	pp.	119a-b).	As	before,	it	is	written	in	the	ḍākiṇ
ῑ
	script	of	Oḍḍiyāna.	The	main
verses	are	preceded	by	OṂ	ĀḤ	HŪṂ	and	concluded	by	the	ten	syllables	of
bodily	energy	(SASĀ	ṚṜ	ḶḸ	IĪ	MAMĀ),	and	those	indicative	of	buddha-body
(RARĀ).	See	Namkhai	Norbu,	
The	Dzogchen	Ritual	Practices
,	pp.	132-6.

6
	
These	twenty-five	mantras	which	follow	are	again	rendered	in	the	ḍākiṇ
ῑ
language	of	Oḍḍiyāna,	as	distinct	from	Sanskrit.
7
	
Tib.	
phyir	mi-ldog-pa’i	sa
.
8
	
Tib.	
nyams-gong	’phel-ba’i	snang-ba.
9
	
Tib.	
rig-pa’i	tshad-pheb-kyi	snang-ba.
10
	
Tib.	
ngo-bo	rang-bzhin	thugs-rjer	grol.
11
	
Tib.	
btags-cing	dbugs-la	sleb-pa’i	tshad	grol.
12
	
The	Delhi	reprint	(p.	225)	comments	that	each	of	these	preceding	mantras
encapsulates	the	natural	sound	of	reality	(
chos-nyid	rang-sgra
)	and	is	capable	of
conferring	liberation.	As	such,	these	mantras	are	contrasted	with	the
vidyāmantra
	
and	
dhāraṇ
ῑ
mantra
.	See	Namkhai	Norbu,	
The	Dzogchen	Ritual
Practices
	
,	pp.	128ff.
13
	
From	this	point	onwards,	the	mantras	are	rendered	in	Sanskrit.	On	the
‘hundred	enlightened	families	of	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities’	(
zhi-khro
rigs-brgya
),	see	Appendix	Two.
14
	
As	in	all	the	verses	that	follow,	these	events	occur	when	the	mantra	circle	is
worn	at	the	time	of	death.
15
	
The	subtle	wheel	of	vibrant	mantra	letters,	vowels	and	consonants,	from
which	the	seed-syllables	of	the	various	deities	are	formed.	See	GGFTC,	Ch.	4,
pp.	544-74.
16
	
The	text	(p.	265,	l.	3-4)	reads	‘blue’	at	this	juncture.
17
	
The	Varanasi	reprint	gives	the	alternative	mantra	for	Mañjuśr
ῑ
:	VĀGĪŚVARĪ
MUṂ	ŚRĪ	SVĀHĀ.
18
	
The	abridged	version	of	this	text	suggests	that	subtle	relics	rather	than
rainbow	lights	will	appear	at	this	juncture,	in	conformity	with	the	opening	verse
of	this	section.
19
	
For	Nart
ῑ
,	the	alternative	form	‘Naivedyā’	(Tib.	
Zhal-zos-ma
)	is	also	found.
20
	
Here	substantialism	(
mtshan-‘dzin
)	refers	to	the	grasping	at	characteristics,
having	failed	to	understand	that	they	lack	inherent	existence.
21
	
This	verse	is	omitted	in	our	text,	but	found	in	the	abridged	version.

22
	
For	a	more	detailed	explanation	of	the	above	mantras	of	the	Forty-two
Peaceful	Deities,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	690-96.
23
	
The	text	does	not	add	significant	detail	to	the	description	of	the	mantras	of
the	Twenty-eight	Iśvar
ῑ.
	The	actual	mantras	for	this	series	are	reproduced
according	to	
rDor-rje	me-long
,	Peking	Kangyur,	Vol.	10,	p.	20;	but	with	the
Sanskrit	corrected	in	accordance	with	GGFTC,	pp.	1124-8.
24
	
This	verse	is	omitted	in	our	text,	but	found	in	the	abridged	version.	For	a
more	detailed	explanation	of	the	above	mantras	of	the	sixty	wrathful	deities,
including	a	number	of	variants,	see	Longchen	Rabjampa,	GGFTC,	pp.	1144-56.
25
	
On	the	nature	of	these	six	syllables,	which	are	associated	with	the	six	realms
of	existence	according	to	the	tradition	of	the	Innermost	Spirituality	(
snying-thig
),	see	Namkhai	Norbu,	
The	Dzogchen	Ritual	Practices
,	p.	123.
26
	
On	the	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	of	Vajrasattva,	see	glossary.	On	the	breaches
of	the	commitments,	which	it	rectifies,	see	above,	Ch.	7;	and	on	the	negativity
and	obscurations,	which	it	purifies,	see	Ch.	1	and	Ch.	6.
27
	
On	this	mantra,	generally	known	as	the	Heart-mantra	of	Dependent
Origination,	see	glossary.
28
	
Tib.	
mgo-’jug	ma-log
.	Here	this	refers	to	the	importance	of	folding	the	paper
so	that	the	heads	and	tails	of	the	various	letters	are	not	inverted	or	wrongly
positioned.
29
	
The	booklet	is	then	inserted	within	a	golden	casket,	also	known	as	
legs-‘bam
,
that	may	be	tied	in	a	top-knot	on	the	yogin’s	head	or	worn	around	the	neck.

Bibliography
For	abbreviations	used	occasionally	here,	see	pp.	403-4.

Section	One:	Canonical	Texts
a)	Anthologies
Kangyur
	 (Tib:	
bKa’-’gyur
;	 Eng:	
Collected	 Translations	 of	 the	 Buddha’s
Teachings
).	 Several	 editions	 are	 extant	 including	 the	 authoritative	 Derge
xylographic	edition	in	103	vols.
rNying-ma’i	rgyud-’bum
	(Eng:	
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
).	Several
manuscript	versions	are	extant,	but	only	one	xylographic	edition	at	Derge	in	26
vols.
b)	Sūtras	(
mdo-sde
)
Avataṃsakasūtra
	 (Tib:	
mDo-sde	 phal-po-che
;	 Eng:	
Sūtra	 of	 the	 Great
Bounteousness	of	the	Buddhas
).	T	44,	MTTWL	197,	translated	by	T.	Cleary,	
The
Flower	Ornament	Scripture
,	3	vols.	Boulder:	Shambhala,	1984	onwards.
Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra
	(Tib:	
mDo-sde	za-ma-tog
;	Eng:	
Sūtra	of	the	Cornucopia	of
Avalokiteśvara’s	 Attributes
),	 ed.	 P.	 L.	 Vaidya,	 Buddhist	 Sanskrit	 Texts,	 17
(1961).	T	116,	MTTWL	90.
Laṅkāvatārasūtra
	(Tib:	
mDo-sde	laṅkar	gshegs-pa
;	Eng:	
Sūtra	of	the	Descent	to
Laṅkā
),	ed.	P.	L.	Vaidya,	Buddhist	Sanskrit	Texts	3	(1963).	T	107,	translated	by
D.	T.	Suzuki,	London:	Routledge	and	Kegan	Paul,	1932,	1956,	
etc.
Prajñāpāramitā
	 (Tib:	
Sher	 phyin
,	 Eng:	
Transcendental	 Perfection	 of
Discriminative	 Awareness
):	 a	 collective	 name	 for	 a	 whole	 genre	 of	 sūtras,
including	the	three	longest	versions	in	100,000	sections	(T	8),	25,000	sections	(T
9)	and	8,000	sections	(T	12).	See	MTTWL	208,	154	and	222	respectively.
Extensively	translated	by	E.	Conze.
Ratnakūṭa
	(Tib:	
dKon-mchog	brtsegs-pa
;	Eng:	
Mound	of	Precious	Gems
).	T	45-
93,	MTTWL	122.	Extensive	selections	are	contained	in	G.	C.	C.	Chang,	
A
Treasury	 of	 Mahāyāna	 Sūtras:	 Selections	 from	 the	 Mahāratnakūṭa
.
Pennsylvania:	Pennsylvania	State	University	Press,	1983.
Sandhinirmocanasūtra
	 (Tib:	
dGongs-pa	 nges-par	 ’grel-pa	 theg-pa	 chen-po’i
mdo
;	Eng:	
Sūtra	of	the	Unravelling	of	Enlightened	Intention
).	T	106,	MTTWL

197.	
Partial	 translation	 in	 John	 Powers,	
Jnanagarbha’s	 Commentary	 on	 the
Samdhinirmocana	Sutra
.
Tathāgatagarbhasūtra
	(Tib:	
De-bzhin	gshegs-pa’i	snying-po’i	mdo
;	Eng:	
Sūtra
of	the	Nucleus	of	the	Tathāgata
).	T	258,	MTTWL	231.
Vajracchedikā
	(Tib:	
rDo-rje	gcod-pa
;	Eng:	
Diamond	Cutter
),	ed.	P.	L.	Vaidya,
Buddhist	Sanskrit	Texts	17	(1961),	T	16,	translated	and	edited	by	E.	Conze,
Serie	Orientale	Roma	13	(1957).	Retranslated	in	Red	Pine,	
Diamond	Sutra
,	New
York:	Counterpoint,	2001.
c)	Tantras
Buddhasamāyoga
	 (Tib:	
Sangs-rgyas	 mnyam-sbyor-gi	 rgyud
;	 Eng:	
Tantra	 of
Union	in	Equilibrium	with	the	Buddhas
).	T	366-7,	Derge	NGB	Vols.	11-12.
Guhyagarbha	Tantra
	 (Tib:	
rGyud	 gsang-ba’i	 snying-po
;	 Eng:	
Tantra	 of	 the
Secret	Nucleus
).	T	832,	Derge	NGB	Vol.	9,	ed.	and	translated	in	G.	Dorje,
GGFTC,	1987.
Guhyasamāja	Tantra
	(Tib:	
rGyud	gsang-ba	’dus-pa
;	Eng:	
Tantra	of	the	Secret
Assembly
),	ed.	S.	Bagchi,	Buddhist	Sanskrit	Texts	9	(1965),	ed.	B.	Bhattacharya,
Gaekwad’s	Oriental	Series,	53	(1967).	T	442-3,	Derge	NGB	Vol.	12.	Translated
by	F.	Fremantle	in	
A	Critical	Study	of	the	Guhayasamāja	Tantra
,	Unpublished
PhD	thesis	no.	774	271989,	University	of	London.
Kun-byed	rgyal-po’i	rgyud
	(Eng:	
Tantra	of	the	All-accomplishing	King
).	T	828,
Derge	 NGB	 Vol.	 5.	 Translated	 in	 E.	 K.	 Neumaier-Dargyay,	
Sovereign	 All-
creating	Mind
,	Albany:	SUNY	(1992).
mDo	dgongs-pa	’dus-pa
	(Eng:	
Sūtra	Which	Gathers	All	Intentions
).	T	829,
Derge	NGB	Vol.	7.
Nyi-zla	kha-sbyor
	(Eng:	
Tantra	of	the	Coalescence	of	Sun	and	Moon
).	Derge
NGB	Vol.	4.
rDo-rje	 sems-dpa’	 sgyu-’phrul	 me-long
	 (Eng:	
Tantra	 of	 the	 Mirror	 of	 the
Magical	Net	of	Vajrasattva
).	Derge	NGB	Vol.	11.
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra
	(Tib:	
Ngan-song	sbyong-rgyud
;	Eng:	
Tantra	of
the	 Purification	 of	 the	 Lower	 Realms
).	 T	 483,	 485,	 ed.	 and	 translated	 T.
Skorupski	 in	
The	 Sarvadurgatipariśodhana	 Tantra:	 Elimination	 of	 All	 Evil
Destinies
,	Motilal	Banarsidas,	1983.
sKu-gdung	’bar-ba’i	rgyud
	(Eng:	
Tantra	of	the	Cremation	of	Corpses
).	Derge
NGB	Vol.	3.

Section	Two:	Commentarial	Literature
a)	Anthologies
Tengyur
	 (Tib:	
bsTan-’gyur
;	 Eng:	
Collected	 Translations	 of	 the	 Classical
Treatises
).	Again	there	are	several	extant	versions,	including	the	authoritative
Derge	xylographic	edition	in	213	vols.
rNying-ma’i	bka’-ma
	(Eng:	
Collected	Teachings	of	the	Nyingmapa
).	The	most
extensive	 anthology	 of	 Nyingma	 commentarial	 literature,	 edited	 by	 Khenpo
Jamyang	at	Katok	(1999)	in	120	vols.
b)	Commentaries	of	Indic	Origin
Ajitamitragupta,	
’Chi	 slu-ba’i	 gdams-pa
	 (Eng:	
Teachings	 on	 the	 Ritual
Deception	of	Death
).	T	2839.
Maitreya,	
Abhisamayālaṃkāra
	 (Tib:	
mNgon-rtogs	 rgyan
;	 Eng:	
Ornament	 of
Emergent	Realisation
).	T	3786,	MTTWL	2-5.	On	this	work	see	also	Trangu
Rinpoche,	
Ornament	of	Clear	Realization
,	Auckland:	Zhyisil	Chokyi	Ghatsal
Publications,	2004,	and	Lati	Rinbochay	
et	al
.,	
Meditative	 States	 in	 Tibetan
Buddhism
,	London:	Wisdom,	1982.
Nāgārjuna,	
Prajñānāmamūlamadhyamakakārikā
	(Tib:	
dBu-ma	rtsa-ba’i	tshig-
le’ur	 byas-pa	 shes-rab	 ces-bya-ba
;	 Eng:	
Root	 Stanzas	 of	 the	 Madhyamaka
entitled	Discriminative	Awareness
),	ed.	P.	L.	Vaidya,	Buddhist	Sanskrit	Texts	10
(1960).	T	3824,	translated	in	F.	J.	Streng,	
Emptiness:	A	Study	in	Religious
Meaning
,	 Nashville/New	 York:	 Abingdon,	 1967,	 and	 by	 K.	 Kalupahana,
Mūlamadhyamakakārikās
	
,	Albany:	SUNY,	1986.
Śāntaraksita,	
Tattvasamgraha
	 (Tib:	
De-nyid	 bsdus-pa
;	 Eng:	
Compendium	 of
Topics
).	T	4266,	ed.	D.	Shastri,	Baudha	Bharati	Series	1-2	(1968),	translated	by
G.	Jha,	Gaekwad’s	Oriental	Series	80	(1937),	83	(1939).
—	—	
Madhyamakālaṃkāra
	(Tib:	
dBu-ma	rgyan
;	Eng:	
Ornament	of	the	Middle
Way
).	T	3884,	ed.	and	translated	in	Masamichi	Ichigo,	
Madhyamakālaṃkāra
,
Kyoto:	Kyoto	Sangyo	University,	1985.
Tathāgatarakṣita,	
Mṛtyuṣādhāpaka
	(Tib:	
’Chi-ba	bslu-ba
;	Eng:	
Ritual	Deception

of	Death
).	T	1702.
Tilopā,	
Ṣaḍdharmopadésa
	(Tib:	
Nāro	chos-drug
;	Eng:	
The	Six	Doctrines	of
Nāropā
	
).	T	2330.	See	H.	V.	Guenther,	
The	Life	and	Teaching	of	Nāropā
.
Oxford:	Clarendon	Press,	1963.
Vāg
ῑ
śvarak
ῑ
rti,	
Mṛtyuvañcanopadeśa
	 (Tib:	
’Chi-ba	 bslu-ba
;	 Eng:	
Esoteric
Instructions	on	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
).	T	1748.
Vasubandhu,	
Abhidharmakośa
	(Tib:	
Chos-mgon	pa’i	mdzod
;	Eng:	
Treasury	of
the	Abhidharma
),	ed.	D.	Shastri,	Baudha	Bharati	Series	5-8	(1970-72).	T	4089,
French	translation	by	L.	de	la	Vallee-Poussin,	
L’Abhidharmakośa	de	Vasubandhu
,	6	vols.,	Paris,	Paul	Geuthner,	1923	—	36.	English	translation	by	L.	Pruden,
Abhidharmakośabhāsyaṃ
,	4	vols.	Berkeley:	Asian	Humanities	Press,	1988.
c)	Commentaries	of	Tibetan	Origin
Dudjom	Rinpoche,	
bsTan-pa’i	rnam-gzhag
	(Eng:	
Fundamentals	of	the	Nyingma
School
).	Translated	in	NSTB.
Gampopa,	
Dvags-po	 thar-rgyan
	 (Eng:	
The	 Jewel	 Ornament	 of	 Liberation
).
Translated	by	H.	V.	Geunther,	Berkeley:	Shambhala,	1971.
Gendun	Gyeltsen,	
gTer-ston	lung-bstan-dang	khungs-btsun-pa	bla-ma	brgyud-
pa’i	rim-pa-rnams
	(Eng:	
Padmasambhava’s	Prophecy	of	the	Treasure-finder	and
the	Series	of	Authentic	Lineage	Teachers
).	Contained	in	DR,	Vol.	1,	pp.	21-6.
Gyarawa	 Namka	 Chokyi	 Gyeltsen,	
rGyud-pa’i	 lo-rgyus	 bsdus-pa	 nor-bu’i
phreng-ba
	 (Eng:	
Jewel	 Garland:	 An	 Abridged	 History	 of	 the	 Lineage
).
Contained	in	DR,	Vol.	1,	pp.	27-48.
Longchen	 Rabjampa,	
Grub-mtha’	 mdzod
	 (Eng:	
Treasury	 of	 Spiritual	 and
Philosophical	Systems
),	ed.	Dodrup	Chen	Rinpoche,	Gangtok,	Sikkim,	
c
.	1969.
—	—	
gNas-lugs	mdzod
	(Eng:	
Precious	Treasury	of	the	Way	of	Abiding
),	trans.
Richard	Barron,	Padma	Publications,	1987.
Ngari	Paṇchen,	
sDom-gsum	rnam-nges
	(Eng:	
Ascertainment	of	the	Three	Vows
).
Contained	in	NK,	Vol.	51.	See	HH	Dudjom	Rinpoche’s	commentary	in	
Perfect
Conduct:	Ascertaining	the	Three	Vows
,	Boston:	Wisdom	Publications,	1996.
Patrul	Rinpoche,	
mKhas-pa’i	shri	rgyal-po	mkhas-chos
,	in	the	
Collected	Works
of	Patrul	Orgyan	Jigme	Chokyi	Wangpo
	(
dPal-sprul	gsung-’bum
),	Vol.	5,	pp.
206-25.	On	this	text,	see	HH	Dalai	Lama,	‘Hitting	the	Essence	in	Three	Words’,
in	
Dzogchen:	The	Heart	Essence	of	the	Great	Perfection
,	pp.	61-92,	Snowlion,
2000;	also	Khenpo	Palden	Sherab	and	Khenpo	Tsewang	Dongyal,	
Lion’s	Gaze
,

Sky	Dancer	Press,	1999.
Tsele	Natsok	Rangdrol,	
Bar-do	spyi-don	thams-cad	rnam-pa	gsal-bar	byed-pa
dran-pa’i	me-long
	(Eng:	
Mirror	of	Mindfulness	Clarifying	All	Aspects	of	the
Intermediate	States
),	translated	by	Erik	Schmidt	Pema	Kunsang	in	
The	Mirror	of
Mindfulness
,	Kathmandu:	Rangjung	Yeshe	Publications,	1987.
d)	Treasure-doctrines	(
gter	chos
)
Guru	 Chowang	 (disc.),	
bKa’-brgyad	 gsang-ba	 yongs-rdzogs
	 (Eng:	
Eight
Transmitted	Precepts:	Consummation	of	All	Secrets
).	Contained	in	
bKa’-brgyad
phyogsbsgrigs
	
,	4	vols.
—	—	
bKa’-brgyad	drag-po	rang-byung-ba’i	zhi-khro	na-rag	skong-bzhags-gyi
cho-ga
,	translated	by	K.	Dowman,	‘Emptying	the	Depths	of	Hell’,	in	
Flight	of
the	Garuda
,	pp.	53-61.
Jamgon	 Kongtrul	 (redactor),	
Rin-chen	 gter-mdzod
	 (Eng:	
Store	 of	 Precious
Treasures
	
),	recently	republished	at	Derge	in	76	vols.
Jigme	Lingpa	(disc.),	
Klong-chen	snying-thig
	(Eng:	
Innermost	Spirituality	of
Longchenpa
	
),	contained	in	the	
Collected	Works	of	Jigme	Lingpa
,	Vols.	7-8,
republished	in	3	vols.,	New	Delhi:	Ngawang	Sopa,	1973.	Selections	translated	in
Tulku	Thondup,	
The	Dzogchen	Innermost	Essence	Preliminary	Practice
	(ed.	B.
Beresford),	Dharamsala:	Tibetan	Library	of	Works	and	Archives,	1982;	
The
Assemblage	of	the	Knowledge-holders
,	Shantiniketan,	WB,	1980;	and	in	
The
Queen	of	Great	Bliss
,	Gangtok:	Dodrup	Chen	Rinpoche,	1982.
—	—	
Rig	’dzin	thugs-sgrub	dpal-chen	’dus-pa
,	contained	in	
Klong-chen	snying-
thig
,	Vol.	1,	pp.	616ff.
—	—	
sKu-gsum	zhing-khams	sbyong-ba’i	smon-lam
,	contained	in	
Klong-chen
snying-thig
,	Vol.	2,	pp.	448-52.
Karma	Lingpa	(disc.),	
Zab-chos	zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
	(Eng:	
Peaceful
and	Wrathful	Deities:	A	Profound	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
).	Several	recensions	are	extant.
B.	J.	Cuevas	lists	eighteen	printed	and	manuscript	versions	of	Tibetan	and	sub-
Himalayan	provenance.	These	include	the	most	extensive	and	authoritative,	DR,
the	full	contents	of	which	are	listed	in	Appendix	One,	pp.	381-6.
—	—	
sKongs-bshags	nyams-chags	rang-grol	[gyi	dbang-bskur	gnas-spar	’gro-
drug	rang-grol]
	(Eng:	
Natural	Liberation	through	the	Propelling	of	the	Six
Classes	of	
Beings	into	Higher	Rebirth:	The	[Middle-length]	Empowerments	of

the	Natural	Liberation	of	Degenerated	Commitments	through	Reparation	and
Confession
),	contained	in	DR,	Vol.	1,	pp.	127-60.
—	—	
dBang-’bring
	(Eng:	
Middle-length	Empowerment
).	See	the	previous	entry.
—	—	
bsKang-bshags	nyams-chag	rang-grol-gyi	tshe-’das	gnas-’dren	’gro-drug
rang-grol
	
(Eng:	
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 Degenerated	 Commitments	 through
Reparation	and	Confession:	The	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Six	Classes	of	Living
Beings	through	the	Guidance	of	the	Deceased	to	Higher	Rebirth
),	contained	in
DR,	Vol.	2,	pp.	1-50.
—	 —	
rDzogs-rim	 bar-do	 drug-gi	 khrid-yig
	 (Eng:	
Six	 Guidebooks	 of	 the
Perfection	Stage
),	contained	in	DR,	Vol.	2,	pp.	303	—	432.	Translated	by	Alan
Wallace	and	Gyatrul	Rinpoche	in	
Natural	Liberation
.
—	—	
Bar-do	thos-grol	chen-mo
	(Eng:	
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing	in	the
Intermediate	States
,	
i.e.
	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
),	an	abridgement	of	Karma
Lingpa’s	revelations,	extant	in	several	editions	-	B.	J.	Cuevas	lists	eleven	printed
and	 manuscript	 versions	 of	 Tibetan	 and	 sub-Himalayan	 provenance.	 These
include	the	Amdo	edition,	the	Delhi	reprint	and	the	Varanasi	reprint.	The	text	is
fully	translated	in	the	present	work	for	the	first	time.	Earlier	partial	translations
were	made	by	Kazi	Dawa	Samdup,	in	W.	Y.	Evans-Wentz,	ed.,	
Tibetan	Book	of
the	 Dead
,	 London/Oxford/New	 York:	 Oxford	 University	 Press,	 1927;	 by
Francesca	 Fremantle	 and	 Chogyam	 Trungpa,	
Tibetan	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead
,
Berkeley	/London:	Shambhala,	1975;	by	Robert	Thurman,	
Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
,	Aquarian/Thorsons,	1994;	and	by	Stephen	Hodge	and	Martin	Boord,
Illustrated	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
,	New	York:	Godsfield	Press,	1999.
—	—	
Thugs-rje	chen-po	padma	zhi-khro
	 (Eng:	
Great	 Compassionate	 One:
Lotus	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities
).	 NA,	 but	 extracts	 of	 a	 rediscovered
treasure	(
yang-gter
)	of	the	same	title,	revealed	by	Jamyang	Khyentse	Wangpo,
are	found	in	the	
Rin-chen	gter-mdzod
,	Vol.	34,	pp.	235-432.
Longchen	 Rabjampa	 (disc./redisc.),	
sNying-thig	 ya-bzhi
	 (Eng:	
Four-part
Innermost	Spirituality
),	containing	the	
Bla-ma	yang-tig
,	the	
Bi-ma	snying-thig
,
the	
mKha’-’gro	yang-tig
,	the	
mKha’-’gro	snying-thig
,	 and	
Zab-mo	 yang-tig
.
Derge	xylographic	edition	in	4	vols.,	republished	in	Delhi	by	Sherab	Gyaltsen
Lama	(1975)	in	13	vols.	Catalogue	by	S.	Goodman	in	‘The	Klong-chen	snying-
thig:	An	Eighteenth-century	Tibetan	Revelation’,	Appendix	B.
Orgyan	Lingpa	(disc.),	
Padma	bka’-thang	shel-brag-ma
	(Eng:	
The	Injunctions	of
Padma,	discovered	at	Crystal	Rock
),	Chengdu:	Sichuan	Nationalities	Publishing
House,	1987.	Translated	in	G.	C.	Toussaint,	
Le	Dict	de	Padma
,	Bibliothèque	de
l’Institut	de	Hautes	Études	Chinoises,	Vol.	3,	Paris:	Libraire	Ernest	Leroux,

1933;	and	in	K.	Douglas	and	G.	Bays,	
Life	and	Liberation	of	Padmasambhava
,	2
vols.,	Emeryville,	California:	Dharma	Publications,	1978.
Prahevajra	 (disc.),	
Tshig-gsum	 gnad-du	 brdeg-pa
	 (Eng:	
Three	 Points	 Which
Penetrate	the	Essential
).	Contained	in	
Bi-ma	snying-thig
,	Pt.	1,	Vol.	Ga,	pp.	304-
18.

Section	Three:	Secondary	Sources
Basham,	A.	L.,	
The	Wonder	That	Was	India
,	3rd	edn,	London:	Sidgwick	&
Jackson,	1967.
Beyer,	S.,	
The	Cult	of	Tārā
,	Berkeley:	University	of	California	Press,	1978.
Blezer,	H.,	
Kar	gliṅ	zi	khro:	A	Tantric	Buddhist	Concept
,	Leiden:	Research
School	CNWS,	1997.
Chokyi	Nyima	Rinpoche,	
The	Bardo	Guidebook
	 (trans.	 Eric	 Schmidt	 Pema
Kunsang),	Hong	Kong:	Rangjung	Yeshe	Publications,	1991.
Coleman,	G.	P.	(ed.),	
A	Handbook	of	Tibetan	Culture
,	London:	Rider,	1993.
Cuevas,	B.	J.,	
The	Hidden	History	of	the	Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
,	Oxford:
Oxford	University	Press,	2003.
—	—	‘A	Textual	Survey	of	the	
gter	ma
	of	Karma-gling-pa:	
Zab	chos	zhi	khro
dgongs	pas	rang	grol
	and	
Bar	do	thos	grol	chen	mo
’,	 in	
Tibetan	 Studies:
Proceedings	of	the	Eighth	Seminar	of	the	International	Association	for	Tibetan
Studies
,	Bloomington:	Indiana	University	Press	(forthcoming).
HH	Dalai	Lama,	
Dzogchen:	The	Heart	Essence	of	the	Great	Perfection
,	Ithaca,
New	York:	Snowlion	Publications,	2000.
—	—	
Advice	on	Dying	and	Living	a	Better	Life
,	London:	Rider,	2002.
HH	Dilgo	Khyenste	Rinpoche,	
Pure	Appearance
	(trans.	Ani	Jinpa),	Halifax:
Vajra	Vairochana	Translation	Committee,	1992.
Dorje,	G.,	
The	Guhyagarbhatattvaviniścayamahātantra	and	its	XIVth-century
Tibetan	Commentary	Phyogs	bcu	mun	sel
,	3	vols.,	unpublished	PhD	thesis,
University	of	London,	1987.
—	—	‘The	Nyingma	Interpretation	of	Commitment	and	Vow’,	in	
The	Buddhist
Forum
,	Vol.	2	(1991),	pp.	71-95.
—	—	
Tibetan	Elemental	Divination	Paintings:	Illuminated	Manuscripts	from
The	White	Beryl	of	Sangs-rgyas	rGya-mtsho,	with	the	Moonbeams	treatise	of	Lo-
chen	Dharmaśr
ῑ
,	London:	Eskenasi	and	Fogg,	2001.
Dowman,	K.,	
Flight	of	the	Garuda
.	Boston:	Wisdom	Publications,	1994.
HH	 Dudjom	 Rinpoche,	
The	 Nyingma	 School	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism:	 Its
Fundamentals	and	History
,	translated	by	G.	Dorje	and	M.	Kapstein,	Boston:
Wisdom	Publications,	1991.
—	 —	
Counsels	 from	 My	 Heart
	 (translated	 by	 Padmakara	 Translation
Committee),	Boston:	Shambhala,	2001.

Eckel,	M.	D.,	
Jñānagarbha’s	Commentary	on	the	Distinction	between	the	Two
Truths
,	Albany:	SUNY,	1987.
Epstein,	L.,	‘On	the	History	and	Psychology	of	the	“das-log”,	in	
Tibet	Journal
,
7.4	(1982),	pp.	20-85.
Fremantle,	F.,	
Luminous	Emptiness:	Understanding	the	Tibetan	Book	of	the
Dead
,	Boston:	Shambhala,	2001.
Germano,	D.,	‘Dying,	Death,	and	Other	Opportunities’,	in	D.	S.	Lopez	Jr	(ed.),
Religions	of	Tibet	in	Practice
,	Princeton	University	Press,	1997.
Gethin,	R.,	
The	Foundations	of	Buddhism
,	Oxford	University	Press,	1998.
Kazi,	Sonam	T.	(trans.),	
Kun-zang	La-may	Zhal-lung
,	2	vols.,	Englewood	Cliffs,
New	Jersey:	Diamond	Lotus	Publications,	1989.
Kloetzli,	R.,	
Buddhist	Cosmology
,	Delhi:	Motilal	Banarsidas,	1983.
Kritzer,	 R.,	 ‘Antarābhava	 in	 the	 Vibhāṣā’,	 in	
Notom	 Domu	 Joshi	 Daigaku
Kirisutokyo	Bunka	Kenkyujo	Kiyo	[Maranata]
,	3.5	(1997),	pp.	69-91.
Lalou,	M.,	‘Chemins	du	mort	dans	les	croyances	de	haute-asie’,	in	
Revue	de
l’Histoire	des	Religions
,	135.1	(1949),	pp.	42-8.
Lati	Rinpoche	and	J.	Hopkins,	
Death,	Intermediate	State	and	Rebirth	in	Tibetan
Buddhism
,	Ithaca,	New	York:	Snowlion,	1979.
Mullin,	G.,	
Death	and	Dying:	The	Tibetan	Tradition
,	Boston:	Arkana,	1986.
Namkhai	 Norbu	 (trans.	 Brian	 Beresford),	
The	 Dzogchen	 Ritual	 Practices
,
London:	Kailash	Editions,	1991.
Norbu,	T.,	
The	Small	Golden	Key
,	New	York:	Jewel	Publishing	House,	1977.
Orofino,	G.,	
Sacred	Tibetan	Teachings	on	Death	and	Liberation
,	Dorset:	Prism
Press,	1990.
Paltrul	 Rinpoche,	
The	 Words	 of	 My	 Perfect	 Teacher
	 (trans.	 Padmakara
Translation	Committee),	San	Francisco:	HarperCollins,	1994.
Parfionovitch,	Y.,	Dorje,	G.,	and	Meyer,	F.,	
Tibetan	Medical	Paintings
,	London:
Serindia,	1992.
Pommaret,	 F.,	
Les	 Revenants	 de	 l’au-dela	 dans	 le	 monde	 tibetain:	 Sources
litteraires	 et	 tradition	 vivante
,	 Paris:	 Editions	 du	 Centre	 National	 de	 la
Recherche	Scientifique,	1989.
Reynolds,	J.	M.,	
Self-liberation	through	Seeing	with	Naked	Awareness
,	New
York:	Station	Hill	Press,	1989.
Sogyal	 Rinpoche,	
The	 Tibetan	 Book	 of	 Living	 and	 Dying
,	 San	 Francisco:
HarperCollins,	1992.
Tenga	 Rinpoche,	
Transition	 and	 Liberation
	 (trans.	 Alex	 Wilding),	 Osterby:
Khampa	Buchverlag,	1996.

Tenzin	Wangyal,	
Wonders	of	the	Natural	Mind
,	New	York:	Station	Hill	Press,
1993.
Wallace,	 A.,	 and	 Gyatrul	 Rinpoche,	
Natural	 Liberation:	 Padmasambhava’s
Teachings	on	the	Six	Bardos
,	Boston:	Wisdom	Publications,	1998.
Wayman,	A.,	
The	Buddhist	Tantras:	New	Light	on	Indo-Tibetan	Esotericism
,
London:	Routledge	and	Kegan	Paul,	1973.
Williams,	P.,	
Mahāyāna	Buddhism
,	London/New	York:	Routledge,	1989.
—	—	
The	Reflexive	Nature	of	Awareness:	A	Tibetan	Madhyamaka	Defence
,
Surrey:	Curzon,	1998.

Glossary	of	Key	Terms
(Words	in	bold	type	can	be	referenced	elsewhere	in	the	glossary;	Tibetan	and
Sanskrit	words	are	given	in	italics	and	text	names	in	italics.	For	a	description	of
the	 meditational	 deities	 forming	 the	 maṇḍala	 of	 the	 Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful
Deities	see	Appendix	Two.)
	
Abhidhrma
	
mngon-pa’i	chos
This	 is	 a	 generic	 term	 referring	 to	 the	 classical	 Buddhist	 literature	 on
phenomenology,	psychology,	epistemology,	and	cosmology.
	
Abhirati
	
mngon-par	dga’-ba
,	Skt.	
Abhirati
The	eastern	
buddha	field
	of	Manifest	Joy	is	the	
pure	realm
	associated	with	the
male	
buddha
	
Akṣobhya-
Vajrasattva
.
	
Abiding	Nature	of	Reality
	
gnas-lugs
The	‘abiding	nature	of	reality’	is	a	synonym	for	
emptiness
	 as	 well	 as	 the
expanse
	of	
actual	reality
	(
dharmadhātu
).
	
Absence	of	Self-identity
	
bdag-med
,	Skt.	
nairātmya
See	
Selflessness
.
	
Accomplished	Master
	
grub-thob
,	Skt.	
siddha
An	 accomplished	 master	 is	 one	 who	 has	 fully	 developed	 the	 supreme	 and
common	spiritual	
accomplishments
.
	
Accomplishement
	
dngos-grub
,	Skt.	
siddhi
Spiritual	accomplishments	may	be	supreme	or	common.	The	former	(
mchog-gi
dngos-grub
)	refers	to	the	accomplishment	of	
enlightement
	or	
buddhahood
.	The
latter	(
thun-mong-gi	dngos-grub
)	are	a	series	of	mystical	powers	gained	through
meditative	practices,	which	are	based	on	
mantra
	recitation	in	the	context	of
specific	rituals.
	
Accumulation
	
tshogs
,	Skt.	
sambhāra

The	Tibetan	word	
tshogs
	generally	has	two	senses,	corresponding	to	the	Sanskrit
sambhāra
	and	
gaṇa
.	In	the	former	case	it	refers	to	the	two	accumulations	of
merit
	(Tib.	
bsod-nams-kyi	tshogs
,	Skt.	
puṇyasambhāra
)	and	
pristine	cognition
(Tib.	
ye-shes-kyi	 tshogs
,	 Skt.	
jñānasambhāra
),	 which	 are	 gathered	 by
bodhisattvas
	 on	 the	 path	 to	
buddhahood
.	 The	 fulfilment	 of	 the	 ‘two
accumulations’	 constitutes	 the	 fruition	 of	 the	 entire	 path,	 according	 to	 the
Greater	Vehicle
	(
Mahāyāna
),	resulting	in	the	maturation	of	the	
Buddha-body
of	 Form
	 (
rūpakāya
)	 and	 the	
Buddha-body	
of	 Reality
	 (
dharmakāya
)
respectively.	For	the	second	meaning	of	
tshogs
,	see	
Feast-offering.
	
Accumulation	of	Merit
	
bsod-nams-kyi	tshogs
,	Skt
.	puṇyasambhāra
See	
Merit
.
	
Actual	Reality
	
chos-nyid
,	Skt.	
dharmatā
According	to	the	
Greater	Vehicle
	or	
Mahāyāna
	Buddhism,	actual	reality	is	a
synonym	for	
emptiness
	(
śūnyatā
),	which	refers	to	the	ultimate	nature	of	
reality
.
See	also	
Apparent	reality
.
	
Aeon
	
bskal-pa
,	Skt.	
kalpa
The	aeon	is	a	fundamentally	important	concept	in	the	traditional	Indian	and
Buddhist	understanding	of	cyclical	time.	According	to	
Abhidharma
	literature,	a
great	aeon	(
mahākalpa
)	is	divided	into	eighty	lesser	or	intervening	aeons.	In	the
course	of	one	great	aeon,	the	external	universe	and	its	sentient	life-forms	unfold
and	disappear.	During	the	first	twenty	of	the	lesser	aeons,	the	universe	is	in	the
process	of	creation	and	expansion	(
vivartakalpa
);	during	the	next	twenty	it
remains	created;	during	the	third	twenty,	it	is	in	the	process	of	destruction	or
contraction	(
samvartakalpa
);	and	during	the	last	quarter	of	the	cycle,	it	remains
in	a	state	of	destruction.
	
Aggregate
	
phung-po
,	Skt.	
skandha
A	 general	 philosophical	 term	 referring	 to	 the	 principal	 psycho-physical
components	 which	 constitute	 the	 mind-body	 complex	 of	 a	
sentient	 being
.
Buddhist	literature	speaks	of	five	such	components,	technically	known	as	the
five	psycho-physical	aggregates	(
pañcaskandha
).	These	are:	the	
aggregate	of
form
	(
rūpaskandha
),	the	
aggregate	of	feelings
	(
vedanāskandha
),	the	
aggregate
of	perceptions
	(
saṃjñāskandha
	
),	the	
aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies
(
saṃskāraskandha
),	and	the	
aggregate	of	consciousness
	(
vijñānaskandha
).	The

Tibetan	term	
phung-po
,	like	its	Sanskrit	counterpart,	literally	means	a	‘heap’	or	a
‘pile’,	an	aggregate	of	many	parts.	
Sentient	beings
	in	the	
desire
	and	
form
realms
	manifestly	possess	all	the	five	aggregates	and	those	in	the	
formless
realm
	only	the	four	mental	aggregates.
	
Aggregate	 of	 Consciousness
	
rnam-par	 shes-pa’i	 phung-po
,	 Skt.
vijñānaskandha
In	the	context	of	our	text	the	aggregate	of	
consciousness
	comprises	the	so-called
‘
eight	classes	of	consciousness
’	(
rnam-shes	tshogs-brgyad
).	These	are:	1)	the
ground-of-all	 consciousness
	 (
kun-gzhi	 rnam-par	 shes-pa
),	 which	 is	 an
undifferentiated	foundational	consciousness	underlying	all	the	other	aspects	of
consciousness	in	which	are	stored	the	imprints	left	by	past	experiences;	2)	the
deluded	consciousness	(
nyonmong	yid-kyi	rnam-par	shes-pa
),	which	is	pervaded
by	fundamental	ignorance	and	is	responsible	for	our	sense	of	selfhood	and
dualistic	 misapprehension	 of	 the	 true	 nature	 of	 phenomena;	 3)	 the	 mental
consciousness	(
yid-kyi	rnam-par	shes-pa
),	which	objectively	refers	to	mental
constructs,	thoughts	and	the	experience	of	our	senses;	4)	visual	consciousness
(
mig-gi	rnam-par	shes-pa
);	5)	auditory	consciousness	(
rna’i	rnam-par	shes-pa
);
6)	olfactory	consciousness	(
sna’i	rnam-par	shes-pa
);	7)	gustatory	consciousness
(
lce’i	rnam-par	shes-pa
);	and	8)	tactile	consciousness	(
luskyi	rnam-par	shes-pa
).
	
Aggregate	of	Feelings
	
tshor-ba’i	phung-po
,	Skt.	
vedanāskandha
The	aggregate	of	feelings	encompasses	the	pleasant,	unpleasant,	and	neutral
sensations	which	arise	as	an	immediate	reaction	to	objects	of	our	senses.
	
Aggregate	of	Form
	
gzugs-kyi	phung-po
,	Skt.	
rūpaskandha
The	aggregate	of	form	includes	both	the	subtle	and	manifest	forms	derived	from
the	
elements
	and	experienced	through	the	five	senses,	including,	of	course,	our
bodies	and	the	environment.	The	aggregate	of	form	is	considered	to	have	fifteen
aspects,	namely	those	related	to	the	
elements
,	earth,	water,	fire	and	wind;	those
related	 to	 the	 five	 sense	 objects,	 visual	 forms,	 sounds,	 smells,	 tastes,	 and
contacts;	those	related	to	the	five	sense-organs,	eye,	ear,	nose,	tongue,	and	body,
and,	lastly,	that	aspect	related	to	imperceptible	forms	which	are	said	to	be
continuously	present	throughout	past,	present	and	future	time.
	
Aggregate	 of	 Motivational	 Tendencies
	
‘du-byas-kyi	 phung-po
,	 Skt.
saṃskāraskandha

The	aggregate	of	motivational	tendencies,	sometimes	translated	also	as	‘mental
formations’,	refers	to	the	array	of	specific	types	of	causative	mental	states	which
give	rise	to	our	characteristic	perspectives	and	emotions	and	which	in	turn
condition	our	actions.	These	are	the	motivating	impulses	behind	our	thoughts,
speech	and	actions	which	relate	in	specific	ways	to	the	perceived	object.	This
aggregate	includes	the	numerous	modalities	of	the	mind,	such	as	the	fifty-one
mental	 factors
	 listed	 in	 the	
abhidharma
	 texts,	 as	 well	 as	 our	 habits,
dispositions,	and	conceptualisation	tendencies.
	
Aggregate	of	Perceptions
	
‘du-shes-kyi	phung-po
,	Skt.	
saṃjñāskandha
The	aggregate	of	perceptions	recognises	and	identifies	forms	and	objects.	It
differentiates	 one	 form/object	 from	 another	 and	 names	 them.	 This	 process
includes	extensive,	minute,	and	mediocre	modes	of	objectifying	perception.
	
Akaniṣṭha
	
’og-min
The	central	
buddha	field
	of	
Akaniṣṭha
	(lit.	the	‘Highest’),	also	known	as	the
Dense	Array	(
Ghanavyūha
),	is	the	pure	realm	associated	with	the	male	
buddha
Vairocana
.
	
Alakāvatī
	
lcang-lo-can
Alakāvat
ῑ
	is	the	name	of	the	abode	of	the	male	
bodhisattva	Vajrapāṇi
.
	
All-surpassing	Realisation
	
thod-rgal
,	Skt.	
vyutkrāntaka
See	under	
Cutting	through	Resistance
.
	
Altruistic	Intention	to	Attain	Enlightenment
	
sems-bskyed
,	Skt.	
cittotpāda
See	
Bodhicitta
.
	
Ancillary	Commitments
	
yan-lag-gi	dam-tshig
See	
Commitments
.
	
Anguished	Spirits
	
yi-dvags
,	Skt.	
preta
Among	the	
six	classes	of	living	beings
,	the	anguished	spirits	are	characterised	as
being	in	a	state	of	existence	which,	in	terms	of	the	degree	of	suffering,	is
intermediate	to	the	animal	and	
hell
	realms.	Born	as	a	result	of	a	preponderance
of	miserliness	in	their	past	actions,	they	are	characterised	by	unsatisfied	craving.

	
Antigod
	
lha-ma-yin
,	Skt.	
asura
One	of	
six	classes	of	living	beings
	(
’gro-ba	rigs-drug
).	The	mode	of	being	and
activity	of	the	antigods	is	said	to	be	engendered	and	dominated	by	envy,	self-
centred	 ambition	 and	 hostility.	 They	 are	 metaphorically	 described	 as	 being
incessantly	 embroiled	 in	 a	 dispute	 with	 the	
gods
	 (Skt.	
deva
/
sura
)	 over	 the
possession	of	a	magical	tree.
	
Anuyoga
	
rjes	su	rnal-’byor
The	eighth	of	the	
nine	vehicles
,	and	second	of	the	three	inner	classes	of	
tantra
,
according	to	the	
Nyingma
	school	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.	
Anuyoga
	emphasises	the
perfection	stage
	of	
meditation
	(
sampannakrama
).
	
Apparent	Reality
	
chos-can
,	Skt.	
dharmin
According	to	the	
Greater	Vehicle
,	the	apparent	reality	of	phenomena	refers	to
the	world	of	conventional	truth	characterised	by	duality,	cause	and	effect	and
multiplicity.	This	is	contrasted	with	the	
actual	reality
,	which	is	the	ultimate
nature	of	phenomena.	See	
Two	Truths
.
	
Arhat
	
dgra-bcom-pa
A	being	who	has	attained	freedom	from	the	
cycle	of	existence
	(
samsāra
)	by
eliminating	the	
karmic
	tendencies	and	the	
dissonant	mental	states
	which	give
rise	to	compulsive	existence	in	a	cycle	of	death	and	rebirth.	
Arhat
,	literally
‘worthy’,	is	interpreted	to	mean	‘Foe	Destroyer’,	the	foe	in	this	context	being	the
dissonant	mental	states
	
which	are	at	the	root	of	our	conditioned	existence.	The
status	of	an	
arhat
	is	the	ideal	goal	to	which	practitioners	of	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
aspire.	An	individual	person	who	becomes	an	
arhat
	has	still	not	become	a	fully
enlightened	buddha
.	This	is	because	the	attainment	of	
buddhahood
	requires,	in
addition	to	the	elimination	of	the	
dissonant	mental	states
,	a	total	overcoming	of
all	the	habitual	tendencies	imprinted	upon	our	mental	continuum	by	our	long
association	with	deluded	states	of	
mind
.	In	other	words,	the	attainment	of	full
enlightenment
	requires	the	total	overcoming	of	all	personal	limitations,	which
can	be	achieved	only	through	a	path	that	possesses	the	unification	of	the	
skilful
means
	of	universal	
compassion
	together	with	the	
discriminative	awareness
directly	perceiving	the	actual	nature	of	
reality
,	at	the	most	profound	level.
	

Ascending	and	Core-penetrating
	
yar-gyi	zang-thal
According	 to	
Atiyoga
,	 the	 attainment	 of	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality
(
dharmakāya
)	is	described	as	‘ascending	and	core-penetrating’	(
yar-gyi	zang-
thal
).	 Here,	 ‘ascending’	 (
yar-gyi
)	 refers	 to	 the	 upward	 movement	 of
consciousness
	through	the	
mentral	channel
	of	the	body	and	the	consequent
‘
core-penetrating
’	 to	 the	 transformation	 of	 consciousness	 into	 the	
pristine
cognition
	of	
reality’s	expanse
	(
dharmadhātujñāna
).
	
Atiyoga
	
shin-tu	rnal-’byor
The	highest	or	ninth	of	the	
nine	vehicles
,	and	the	third	of	the	three	inner	classes
of	
tantra
,	according	to	the	
Nyingma
	school	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	which	is
otherwise	 known	 as	 the	
Great	 Perfection
	 (
rdzogs-pa	 chen-po
).	 See	
Great
Perfection
.
	
Attachment
	
’dod-chags
,	Skt.	
rāga
One	of	the	‘
three	poisons
’	(
dug-gsum
)	of	the	mind,	along	with	
delusion
	and
aversion
.	In	its	extreme	manifestation,	in	the	form	of	insatiable	craving,	it	is	said
to	characterise	the	worlds	of	the	
anguished	spirits
	(
pretaloka
).
	
Aural	Lineage	of	Authoritative	Personages
	
gang-zag	snyan-brgyud
One	of	the	
six	lineages
	through	which	the	Buddhist	teachings	are	transmitted.
The	 aural	 lineage	 of	 authoritative	 persons	 refers	 to	 the	 historical	 line	 of
accomplished	masters
	who	have	been	responsible	for	aurally	transmitting	the
Buddhist	teachings	through	successive	generations.
	
Auspicious	Aeon
	
bskal-pa	bzang-po
,	Skt.	
bhadrakalpa
The	name	of	the	present	
aeon
	of	time,	during	which	one	thousand	
buddhas
	are
predicted	to	appear	in	succession.	Among	these,	
Sākyamuni	Buddha
	is	regarded
as	the	fourth	and	
Maitreya
	as	the	fifth.
	
Avalokiteśara
	
spyan-ras	gzigs	dbang-phyug
Avalokiteśvara
	is	regarded	as	the	embodiment	of	the	compassionate	aspect	of	the
mind
	of	all	the	
buddhas
,	manifesting	in	the	form	of	a	
meditational	deity
.	He	is
revered	as	the	patron	deity	of	Tibet	and	has	many	different	aspects,	the	most
popular	including	the	seated	four-armed	white	form	and	‘thousand-armed’	form
Mahākaruṇika
.	Our	text	refers	to	
Avalokiteśvara
	as	one	of	the	eight	principal

male	
bodhisattvas
.	See	Appendix	Two,	pp.	390-91.
	
Aversion
	
zhe-sdang
,	Skt.	
dveṣa
One	of	the	‘
three	poisons
’	(
dug-gsum
)	of	the	mind.	In	Buddhist	literature,	the
terms	aversion	and	hatred	are	often	used	interchangeably	with	anger.	In	its	subtle
manifestation	aversion	is	said	to	obstruct	an	individual	from	a	correct	perception
of	forms.	In	its	extreme	manifestation,	as	overwhelming	hatred	and	fear,	it	is	said
to	be	characteristic	of	the	worlds	of	the	
hells
	(
narakaloka
).
	
Awareness
	
rig-pa
,	Skt.	
vidyā
As	an	ordinary	verb,	the	Tibetan	term	
rig-pa
	means	‘to	know’	or	‘to	be	aware’.
When	used	as	a	noun,	it	has	several	distinct	though	not	unrelated	meanings,
corresponding	to	the	Sanskrit	
vidyā
:	1)	as	a	general	term	encompassing	all
experiences	of	
consciousness
	and	mental	events,	2)	as	intelligence	or	mental
aptitude,	3)	as	a	science	or	knowledge-based	discipline,	4)	as	a	pure	awareness.
Our	text	generally	assumes	the	last	of	these	meanings,	in	which	cases	it	is	a
synonym	 or	 abbreviation	 for	
intrinsic	 awareness
	 (
rang-rig
).	 See	 under
Intrinsic	Awareness
.
	
Awareness	Holder
	
rig-’dzin
,	Skt
.	vidyādhara
The	awareness	holders	or	knowledge	holders	are	embodiments	of	the	great
accomplished	 masters
	 who	 have	 attained	 the	 highest	
realisations
	 of	 the
tantras
.	Amongst	those	whose	accomplishments	are	classified	as	supramundane
are	
Padmasambhava
	
and	
Vimalamitra
,	who	have	transcended	the	span	of	human
life,	having	attained	the	
rainbow	body
	 through	 the	 practices	 of	 the	
Great
Perfection
.	Five	kinds	of	awareness	holder	are	particularly	identified,	and	their
realisations	are	said	to	parallel	those	of	the	
bodhisattva
	and	
buddha
	levels,
namely	the	awareness	holders	of	maturation,	those	with	power	over	the	lifespan,
those	abiding	on	the	levels,	those	of	the	Great	Seal,	and	those	of	spontaneous
presence.
	
Basic	Commitments
	
rtsa-ba’i	dam-tshig
,	Skt.	
mūlasamaya
See	
Commitment
.
	
Beguiling	Forces
	
bdud
,	Skt.	
māra
See	
Malevolent	Forces
.

	
Being	of	Commitment
	
dam-tshig	sems-dpa’
,	Skt.	
samayasattva
.
When	deities	are	visualised	in	
meditation
,	the	form	of	the	deity	that	is	visually
generated	by	the	meditator	is	known	as	the	Being	of	Commitment.	This	is
differentiated	from	the	
Being	ofPristine	Cognition
	(	
jñānasattva
,	Tib.	
ye-shes
sems-dpa’
)	or	the	actual	
meditational	deity
,	which	is	invited	to	enter	into	the
visualised	form.
	
Being	of	Pristine	Cognition
	
ye-shes	sems-dpa’
,	Skt.	
jñānasattva
See	above	under	
Being	of	Commitment
.
	
Bewildered	Perception
	
’khrul-snang
The	bewildering	perceptions	generated	by	the	subject-object	dichotomy.
	
Bewilderment
	
’khrul-pa
,	Skt.	
bhrānti
Bewilderment	is	the	confusion	arising	from	the	subject-object	dichotomy	and
fundamental	ignorance
,	on	the	basis	of	which	rebirth	in	
cyclic	existence
	is
perpetuated.
	
Bewitchers
	
’gong-po
	
A	class	of	malign	spirits	that	are	thought	to	frequent	the	atmosphere	and	the
earth,	many	of	whom	were	bound	under	an	oath	of	allegiance	to	Buddhism	by
Padmasambhava
	 during	 the	 eighth	 century.	 Their	 power	 to	 generate	 life-
threatening	obstacles,	to	assail	bereaved	persons,	and	so	forth	can	be	averted	by
counteracting	rituals.
	
Bhaiaṣajyaguru
	
sman-bla
See	
Vaiḍūryaprabharāja.
	
Bessing
	
byinrlabs
,	Skt.	
adhiṣṭhāna
	
In	the	Buddhist	context,	the	term	blessing
should	not	be	understood	in	terms	of	grace	as	in	the	case	of	theistic	religions.
Rather,	it	relates	to	the	sense	of	inspiration	received	from	an	external	source,
which	 transforms	 or	 awakens	 the	 potentials	 inherent	 within	 an	 individual’s
mental	continuum.	Thus,	the	Tibetan	word	
byinrlabs
	
is	interpreted	to	mean:	‘to
be	transformed	through	inspiring	magnificence’.

	
Blood-drinking	[Heruka]
	
khrag-’thung	[he-ru-ka]
,	Skt.	
heruka
The	Sanskrit	word	
heruka
	is	interpreted	to	mean	‘one	who	delights	in	drinking
blood’	or	‘one	who	holds	a	skull	filled	with	blood’,	symbolising	the	wrathful
dynamic	transformation	of	the	deep-seated	
dissonant	mental	states
.
	
Blood-filled	skull
	
dung-dmar
,	Skt.	
bhandha/bhānṇḍaka
In	tantric	iconography,	
meditational	deities
	are	often	depicted	holding	skull-
cups	filled	with	blood.	The	human	skull	symbolises	mortality	and	impermanence
while	the	blood	represents	the	transmutation	of	
dissonant	mental	states
	into
pristine	cognition
.
	
Bodhicitta
	
byang-chub-kyi	sems
An	altruistic	intention	or	aspiration	to	attain	full	
enlightenment
	for	the	benefit
of	all	beings.	
Bodhicitta
	is	cultivated	on	the	basis	of	certain	mental	attitudes,
principal	among	them	being	the	development	of	
love
	and	great	
compassion
towards	all	beings	equally.	The	Tibetan	tradition	speaks	of	two	major	systems
for	training	one’s	
mind
	
in	the	generation	of	
bodhicitta
:	the	first	is	
Atiśa
’s	‘seven-
point	cause	and	effect’	and	the	second	is	
Śāntideva
’s	‘equality	and	exchange	of
oneself	with	others’.	A	genuine	generation	of	
bodhicitta
	is	attained	only	when,
through	the	training	of	the	
mind
,	the	aspiration	to	attain	full	
enlightenment
becomes	spontaneous	and	no	longer	requires	any	deliberate	exertion.	At	that
stage	 the	 individual	 becomes	 a	
bodhisattva
.	 Literally,	
bodhi
	 means
‘
enlighhtenment
’,	and	
citta
,	‘
mind
’.	 The	 literature	 of	 the	
Greater	Vehicle
speaks	of	two	types	of	
bodhicitta
:	the	conventional	
bodhicitta
	and	the	ultimate
bodhicitta
.	The	former	refers	to	that	aspect	of	
bodhicitta
	defined	above,	whereas
the	latter	refers	to	the	
mind	of	enlightenment
	
i.e.
	the	discriminative	awareness
directly	realising	
emptiness
,	which	is	induced	by	the	above	altruistic	
aspiration.
The	 cultivation	 of	 an	 altruistic	 intention	 (
sems-bskyed
,	 Skt.	
cittotpāda
)	 is
included	among	the	
preliminary	practices
	(
sngon-’gro
),	in	which	context	it	is
said	to	be	an	antidote	for	envy	or	self-centred	ambition.	In	the	
tantras
,	however,
the	 term	
bodhicitta
	 (
byang-sems
)	 specifically	 refers	 to	 the	 white/male	 and
red/female	
generative	essences
	of	the	body.
	
Bodhisattva
	
byang-chub	sems-dpa’
A	spiritual	trainee	dedicated	to	the	cultivation	and	fulfilment	of	the	
altruistic
intention	 to	 attain	 enlightenment
,	 who	 is	 gradually	 traversing	 the	 five

bodhisattva
	
paths
	
(
pañcamārga
)	and	ten	
bodhisattva
	levels	(
daśabhūmi
).	An
essential	element	of	this	commitment	to	work	for	others	is	the	determination
purposely	to	remain	within	
cyclic	existence
	instead	of	simply	seeking	freedom
from	
suffering
	for	oneself.	Philosophically,	the	
bodhisattva
	is	said	to	have	fully
realised	the	two	aspects	of	
selflessness,
	with	respect	to	
dissonant	mentalstates
and	the	nature	of	all	phenomena.
	
Bodhisattva	Vows
	
byang-chub	sems-dpa’i	sdom-pa
,	Skt.	
bodhisattvasaṃvara
See	
Vows
.
	
Bon
An	ancient	spiritual	tradition,	considered	by	some	scholars	to	be	of	Zoroastrian
or	Kashmiri	Buddhist	origin,	which	was	widespread	in	Tibet,	particularly	in	the
far-western	 region	 of	
Zhangzhung
	 prior	 to	 the	 official	 introduction	 and
establishment	of	Buddhism.	Although	its	literature	clearly	distinguishes	it	from
both	the	indigenous	shamanism	or	animism	of	Tibet	and	the	Buddhist	traditions,
it	has	over	the	last	several	hundred	years	assimilated	many	of	the	Buddhist
teachings	 and	 developed	 a	 neo-Buddhist	 theoretical	 foundation.	 The	
Bon
tradition	is	particularly	strong	in	the	
Shang
	valley	of	Western	Tibet,	in	
Kongpo
,
Khyungpo
	and	the	
Ngawa
	
region	of	
Amdo
.
	
Bone	relics
	
gdung/ring-srel
Within	the	tradition	of	the	
Great	Perfection
	(
rdzogs-pa	chen-po
),	four	kinds	of
relics	are	said	to	be	left	behind	following	the	death	of	an	
accomplished	master
.
These	are:	relics	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
	(
chos-sku’i	ring-srel
	),	relics	in
the	form	of	major	and	minor	bone	remains	(
sku-gdung	ring-srel
),	relics	in	the
form	of	clothing	(
sku-bal	ring-srel
	),	and	relics	of	miniature	size	(
nyung-ngu	lta-
bu’i	ring-srel
	).	Among	these,	the	major	bone	relics	(
gdung
)	and	minor	bone
relics	
(ring-srel
)	are	retrieved	from	the	funeral	pyre.	Biographical	literature
suggests	that	the	veneration	of	such	relics	has	been	continuously	observed	within
Buddhism	from	the	time	of	
Sākyamuni
	
Buddha
,	whose	own	bone	relics	were
interred	within	eight	
stūpas
.	Five	kinds	of	major	bone	relic	are	specifically
enumerated.	See	Chapter	14.
	

Brahman	Class
	
bram-ze’i	rigs
,	Skt.	
brāhmaṇavarṇa
The	priestly	class,	among	the	four	traditional	classes	of	Hindu	society.
	
Buddha
	
sangs-rgyas
The	 Sanskrit	 term	 buddha	 literally	 means	 ‘awakened’,	 ‘developed’,	 and
‘enlightened’.	The	Tibetan	equivalent	
sangs-rgyas
	is	a	combination	of	
sangs-pa
(‘awakened’	or	‘purified’),	and	
rgyas-pa
	(‘developed’).	These	two	words	in	this
context	denote	a	full	awakening	from	
fundamental	ignorance
	(
avidyā
)	in	the
form	of	the	
two	obscurations
	
(
dvayāvaraṇa
)	and	a	full	
realisation
	of	true
knowledge,	
i.e.
	 the	
pristine	 cognition
	
(	
jñāna
)	 of	
buddha-mind
.	 A	 fully
awakened	being	is	therefore	one	who,	as	a	result	of	training	the	mind	through	the
bodhisattva
	
paths
,	 has	 finally	 realised	 his/	
her	 full	 potential	 for	 complete
enlightenment
	 (
bodhi
),	 and	 has	 eliminated	 all	 the	 obscurations	 to	 true
knowledge	and	
liberation
.	Buddhas	are	characterised	according	to	their	five
fruitional	aspects	of	
buddha-body
	(
kāya
),	
buddha-speech
	(
vāk
),	
buddha-mind
(
citta
),	
buddha-attrattributes
	 (
guṇa
),	 and	
buddha-activities
	 (
krṭyakriyā
),
which	are	poetically	described	in	some	Tibetan	literature	as	the	‘five	wheels	of
inexhaustible	adornment’	(
mi-zad-pa’i	rgyan-gyi	’khor-lo	lnga
).
	
Buddha-activities
	
phrin-las
,	Skt.	
kṛtyakriyā
In	general,	it	is	said	that	the	principal	activity	of	the	
buddhas
	is	to	bring	about
the	 welfare	 of	 all	
sentient	 beings
,	 an	 aim	 which	 initially	 motivated	 their
aspiration	to	attain	the	fully	enlightened	state.	The	
Perfection	of	Discriminative
Awareness
	texts	enumerate	eighty	inexhaustible	buddha-activities,	while	some
commentarial	 treatises	 mention	 twenty-one	 enlightened	 activities	 of	 the
buddhas
.	With	respect	to	the	historical	
Buddha	Sākyamuni
,	the	Buddhist	texts
list	twelve	principal	deeds	that	exemplify	his	enlightened	activities.	These	are	in
succession:	1)	the	descent	from	the	celestial	realm	of	
Tuṣita
,	2)	the	entry	into	the
womb,	3	)	birth,	4)	displaying	mastery	in	worldly	arts	and	skills,	5)	enjoying	the
women	of	the	harem,	6)	renouncing	the	worldly	way	of	life,	7)	undergoing
severe	physical	penances,	8)	meditating	under	the	tree	of	enlightenment,	9)
overcoming	beguiling	and	
malevolent	forces
,	10)	attaining	manifestly	perfect
buddhahood
,	1	1	)	
turning	the	wheel	of	the	sacred	teachings
	
,	and	12)
entering	the	peaceful	state	of	
fnal
	
nirvāṇa
.	In	terms	of	
skilful	means
,	buddha-
activity	 may	 be	 focused	 through	 four	 modalities:	 pacification,	 enrichment,
subjugation,	and	wrathful	transformation.	See	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened
Activity
.	Finally,	according	to	the	literature	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	there	is	an

enumeration	of	five	modes	of	buddha-activity	when	spontaneous	or	effortless
activity	is	included	along	with	these	modalities.
	
Buddha-attributes
	
yon-tan
,	Skt.	
guṇa
The	attributes	of	a	
buddha
	may	be	subsumed	as	specific	qualities	of	
buddha-
body
,	
spech
	and	
mind
.	The	attributes	of	
buddha-body
	are	those	associated	with
the	 various	 ‘dimensions’	 of	
buddha-body
,	 described	 below,	 and	 more
specifically	with	the	
thirty-two	major	and	eighty	minor	marks.
	Those	of
buddha-speech
	are	known	as	the	‘sixty	melodies	of	
Brahmā
’,	which	implies
that	
buddha-speech
	is	soothing,	gentle,	firm,	audible	from	a	great	distance,	and
so	 forth.	 The	 attributes	 of	
buddha-mind
	
are	 threefold:	
compassion
,
omniscience
,	 and	
power
.	 Furthermore,	 in	 the	 literature	 of	 the	
tantras
,	 a
classification	of	five	resultant	enlightened	attributes	is	given,	namely:	the	pure
buddha	field
,	the	dimensionless	
celestial	palace
,	the	radiant	and	pure	rays	of
light,	the	exalted	thrones	of	the	deities,	and	the	possession	of	consummate
resources.
	
Buddha-body
	
sku
,	Skt.	
kāya
The	term	‘buddha-body’	refers	not	only	to	the	physical	body	of	a	
buddha
,	but
also	to	the	varying	‘dimensions’	in	which	the	embodiment	of	fully	enlightened
attributes	is	present.	As	such,	the	buddha-body	can	be	categorised	in	different
ways,	corresponding	to	the	different	levels	of	the	teaching.	For	example,	
sūtras
of	 the	
Lesser	 Vehicle
	 (
h
ῑ
nayāna
)	 speak	 of	 the	
Buddha-body	 ofReality
(
dharmakāya
)	and	the	
Buddha-body	of	Form
	(
rūpakāya
),	while	
sūtras
	of	the
Greater	Vehicle
	(
mahāyāna
)	generally	mention	three	buddha-bodies	(
trikāya
),
dividing	the	latter	into	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	(
sambhogakāya
)
and	the	
Buddha-bodyof	Emanation
	
(
nirmāṇakāya
).	See	below.	In	the	
sūtras
and	treatises	expounding	
buddha-nature
	
(
tathāgatagarbha
),	such	as	
Maitreya
’s
Supreme	Continuum	of	the	Greater	Vehicle
	(
Mahayanottaratantraśāstra
),	 an
enumeration	 of	
four	 buddha-bodies	 (
catuḥkāya
)	 is	 mentioned.	 Here,	 the
Buddha-body	 of	 Essentiality	 (
svabhāvikakāya
)	 is	 added	 to	 the	 above	 three
buddha-bodies,	to	indicate	either	an	active/passive	distinction	in	the	
Buddha-
body	of	Reality
,	or	the	underlying	indivisible	essence	of	the	three	buddha-
bodies.	In	the	
tantras
	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	there	is	an	enumeration	of	
five
buddha-bodies
	 (
pañcakāya
)	 where	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Awakening
(
abhisambodhikāya
,	Tib.	
mngon-byang-gi	sku
)	refers	to	the	apparitional	modes
of	 the	 three	 buddha-bodies,	 and	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Indestructible	 Reality

(
vajrakāya
,	Tib.	
rdo-rje’i	sku
)	refers	to	their	indivisible	essence.	Finally,	in
Atiyoga
,	when	the	buddha-bodies	are	actualised,	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
	is
known	as	the	youthful	vase	body	(
gzhon-nu’i	’bum-pa’i	sku
)	and	the	
Buddha-
bodyt	of	Form
	is	known	as	the	body	of	great	transformation	(
’pho-ba	chen-po’i
sku
).
	
Buddha-bodyof	Emanation
	
sprul-sku
,	Skt.	
nirmāṇakāya
The	Buddha-body	of	Emanation	is	the	visible	and	usually	physical	manifestation
of	fully	enlightened	beings	which	arises	spontaneously	from	the	expanse	of	the
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	whenever	appropriate,	in	accordance	with	the	diverse
dispositions	of	sentient	beings.	The	
sūtras
	refer	to	three	types	of	emanational
body	in	relation	to	
Sākyamuni	Buddha
:	(i)	emanational	birth	in	
Tusita
,	(ii)
emanational	art	forms,	and	(iii)	supreme	emanation	as	one	of	the	thousand
buddhas
	of	the	
auspicious	aeon
.	From	the	distinctive	
Nyingma
	perspective,
however,	the	three	types	of	emanational	body	comprise:	1)	natural	emanations
(
rang-bzhin	sprul-sku
),	which	are	the	
buddhas
	of	the	
five	enlightened	families
such	as	Vairocana	in	the	forms	they	assume	when	appearing	before	
bodhisattvas
of	the	highest	level;	2	)	supreme	emanations	(
mchog-gi	sprul-sku
)	 such	 as
Sākyamuni	Buddha
	and	the	other	
buddhas
	of	this	aeon	who	initiate	a	new
teaching,	and	3)	diversified	emanations	(
sna-tshogs	sprul-sku
),	including	oases,
food,	medicine	and	other	such	material	manifestations,	which	are	of	benefit	to
living	 beings,	 as	 well	 as	 emanational	 art	 forms	 (
bzo-bo	 sprul-sku
)	 and
emanational	births	(
skye-ba	sprul-sku
),	such	as	those	taken	by	
Sākyamuni
	in
previous	lives,	for	example	as	Prince	Satśvetaketu	in	the	god	realm	of	
Tuṣita
.
	
Buddha-body	of	Form
	
gzugs-sku
,	Skt.	
rūpakāya
According	to	the	literature	of	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
	(
h
ῑ
nayāna
)	the	Buddha-body	of
Form	 refers	 to	 the	 thousand	
buddhas
	 of	 the	
auspicious	 aeon
,	 including
Sākyamuni
.	 In	 the	
Greater	 Vehicle
,	 however,	 the	 term	 includes	 both	 the
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource
	 and	 the	
Buddha-bodyof	 Emanation
.
According	to	
Atiyoga
,	when	the	Buddha-body	of	Form	is	actualised	through	the
practices	of	
All-surpassing	Realisation
	
,	a	
rainbow-liht	body
	is	attained,	and
this	realisation	is	known	as	the	Buddha-body	of	Great	Transformation	(’
pho-ba
chen-po’i	sku
).
	
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource
	
longs-spyod	 rdzogs-pa’i	 sku
,	 Skt.
sambhogakāya

The	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	refers	to	the	luminous,	immaterial,	and
unimpeded	 reflection-like	 forms	 of	 the	 pure	 energy	 of	 enlightened	 mind,
exemplified	in	the	case	of	our	text	by	the	assembly	of	the	forty-two	peaceful
deities	and	the	fifty-eight	wrathful	deities	(see	Appendix	Two),	which	become
spontaneously	present	(
lhun-grub
)	and	naturally	manifest	(
rang-snang
)	at	very
high	levels	of	realisation,	that	is	to	say	at	the	point	at	which	the	duality	between
subject	and	object	
dissolves.	The	
intermediate	state	of	reality
	(
chos-nyid	bar-
do
)	is	considered	to	be	an	optimum	time	for	the	realisation	of	the	Buddha-body
of	Perfect	Resource.
	
Buddha-body	ofReality
	
chos-sku
,	Skt.	
dharmakāya
The	Buddha-body	of	Reality	is	the	ultimate	nature	or	essence	of	the	
enlightened
mind
,	 which	 is	 uncreated	 (
skye-med
),	 free	 from	 the	 limits	 of	 conceptual
elaboration	(
spros-pa’i	mtha’-bral
	),	empty	of	inherent	existence	(
rang-bzhin-
gyis	stong-pa
),	naturally	radiant,	beyond	duality	and	spacious	like	the	sky.	The
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
	(
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
)	is	considered	to	be
an	optimum	time	for	the	realisation	of	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality.
	
Buddha	Family
	
de-bzhin	gshegs-pa’i	rigs
,	Skt.	
tathāgatakula
One	of	the	
five	enlightened	families
	(
pañcakula
)	into	which	the	
meditational
deities
	
of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	are	subdivided.	The	deities	of
the	
Buddha
	
family	include	the	peaceful	aspects	Vairocana	and	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	and
the	corresponding	wrathful	aspects	Buddha	Heruka	and	Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ.
	See
Appendix	Two.
	
Buddha	Field
	
zhings-khams
,	Skt.	
[buddha]kṣetra
The	operational	fields	or	‘paradises’	presided	over	by	specific	
buddhas
,	which
spontaneously	 arise	 as	 a	 result	 of	 their	 altruistic	 aspirations,	 are	 known	 as
buddha	fields.	Such	environments	are	totally	free	from	
suffering
,	both	physical
and	mental,	and	they	transcend	the	mundane	
god
	realms	(
devaloka
)	inhabited	by
sentient	beings
	
of	the	
world-systems
	of	desire,	form,	and	formlessness.	It	is
said	that	when	sentient	beings	who	have	not	yet	been	permanently	released	from
the	bondage	of	
cyclic	existence
	have	an	affinity	with	a	specific	
buddha
	and	are
consequently	born	into	a	respective	pure	realm,	they	become	temporarily	free
not	only	from	manifest	
sufferings
	
of	the	body	and	
mind
	but	also	from	the
pervasive	 sufferings	 of	 past	 conditioning.	 Such	 fields	 or	 pure	 realms	 are
regarded	as	conducive	to	the	continuing	cultivation	of	the	path	to	
buddhahood
.

	
Buiddhahood
	
sangs-rgyas	nyid	/	sangs-rgyas-kyi	go-phang
,	Skt.	
buddhatva/
buddhapada
The	attainment	of	a	
buddha
,	who	has	not	only	gained	total	freedom	from
karmically	conditioned	existence	and	overcome	all	the	tendencies	imprinted	on
the	
mind
	as	a	result	of	a	long	association	with	
dissonant	mental	states,
	but	also
fully	 realised	 or	 manifested	 all	 aspects	 of	
buddha-body
,	
buddha-speech
,
buddha-ind
,	
buddha-attributes
	
and	
buddha-actvities
.
	
Buddha-mind
	
thugs
,	Skt.	
citta
The	term	buddha-mind	is	synonymous	with	
pristine	cognition
	(	
jñāna
),	five
modes	of	which	are	differentiated.	See	
Pristine	Cognition
.	In	the	particular
literature	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	these	five	modes	are	distinctively	known	as
manifest	 enlightenment	 (
mngon-byang-gi	 thugs
),	 indivisible	 indestructible
reality	(
mi-phyed	rdo-rje’i	thugs
),	great	sameness	(
mnyam-pa	chen-po’i	thugs
),
great	 non-discursiveness	 (
mi-rtog	 chen-po’i	 thugs
),	 and	 liberator	 of	 sentient
beings	(
’gro-ba’i	sgrol-ba’i	thugs
).
	
Buddha	Nature
	
rigs
,	Skt.	
gotra
The	seed	of	
enlightenment
	inherent	within	the	mental	continuum	of	all	sentient
beings.	It	is	this	potential	which	makes	it	possible	for	every	individual	to	realise
the	ultimate	nature,	given	the	application	of	appropriate	methods.	The	notion	of
buddha	nature	is	intimately	linked	with	the	Buddhist	concept	of	the	essential
nature	of	
mind
,	which	according	to	Buddhism	is	considered	to	be	pure,	knowing
and	luminous.	
Dissonant	 mental	 states
	such	as	
attaahment
,	
aversion
	 and
jealousy,	which	perpetually	afflict	our	mind	and	give	rise	to	
suffering
,	are	not
the	essential	elements	of	our	
mind
	but	adventitious	and	conditioned	tendencies.
Moreover,	these	dissonant	states	are	all	rooted	in	an	ignorant	state	of	mind	which
misapprehends	 the	 true	 nature	 of	
reality
.	 Hence,	 through	 gaining	 genuine
insights	into	the	true	nature	of	
reality
,	misconceptions	can	be	dispelled,	thus
cutting	the	root	of	all	our	
dissonant	mental	states
	and	allowing	the	buddha-
nature	 within	 to	 manifest.	 The	 term	 ‘
nucleus	 of	 the
	
tathāgata
’
(
tathāgatagarbha
)	is	a	synonym	for	this	essence	of	
buddhahood
.
	
Buddha-speech
	
gsung
,	Skt.	
vāk
The	speech	of	the	
buddhas
	is,	according	to	
Nyingma
	literature,	said	to	have	five
aspects	in	that	the	
buddhas
	may	communicate	through	1)	uncreated	meaning

(
skye-med	don-gi	gsung
),	2)	
enlightened	intention
	and	symbols	(
dgongs-pa
brda’i	gsung
),	3)	expressive	words	(
brjod-pa	 tshig-gi	 gsung
),	 4)	 indivisible
reality	(
dbyer-med	rdo-rje’i	gsung
),	and	5	)	the	
blessings
	of	
awareness
	(
rig-pa
byin-labs-kyi	gsung
).	See	
Buddha	Attributes
	and	
Mantra
.
	
Burnt	Offerings
	
sbying-sreg
,	Skt.	
homa
A	
tantric	ritual
in	which	many	substances,	such	as	wheat,	sesame	seeds,	and
mustard,	etc.,	are	burnt	as	offerings	in	a	fire	lit	on	a	specifically	designed	hearth.
There	are	different	types	of	burnt-offering	rituals	corresponding	to	the	enactment
of	the	four	rites	related	to	the	
four	aspecs	of	enlightened	activity:
	pacification,
enrichment,	subjugation	and	wrath.
	
Calm	Abiding
	
zhi-gnas
,	Skt.	
śamatha
Calm	abiding	is	a	meditative	technique	common	to	the	entire	Buddhist	tradition,
characterised	by	a	stabilisation	of	attention	on	an	internal	object	of	observation
conjoined	with	the	calming	of	external	distractions	to	the	mind.	Calm	abiding	is
an	essential	basis	for	training	one’s	mind	in	the	generation	of	
penetratrative
insight
	
(
vipaśyana
),	a	true	analytical	insight	into	the	more	profound	aspects	of	a
chosen	object,	such	as	its	
emptiness
	or	ultimate	nature.
	
Camaradvipa
	
rnga-yab	gling
The	subcontinent	
Cāmaradv
ῑ
pa
	is	particularly	associated,	in	
Nyingma
	literature,
with	the	
Copper-oloured	Moutain
	of	
Padmasambhava
.	See	
Four	Continents
and	Eight	Subcontinents
.
	
Caryatantra
	
spyod-pa’i	rgyud
See	
Ubhayatantra
.
	
Causal	Vehicles
	
rgyu	mtshan-nyid-kyi	theg-pa
See	
Vehicle
.
	
Cause	and	Efffect
	
rgyu-’bras
,	Skt.	
hetuphala
In	the	context	of	Buddhist	philosophy	the	term	refers	to	the	natural	law	that
exists	between	a	cause	and	its	effect.	Some	of	the	principal	features	of	the	law
are:	1)	nothing	evolves	uncaused;	2)	any	entity	which	itself	lacks	a	process	of
change	cannot	cause	any	other	event;	and	3)	only	causes	which	possess	natures

that	accord	with	specific	effects	can	lead	to	those	effects.	The	term	‘cause	and
effect’	is	often	used	to	translate	the	Sanskrit	word	
karma
,	which	literally	means
‘action’.	See	
Past	Actions
.
	
Celestial	Palace
	
gzhal-yas-khang
,	Skt.	
vimāna
See	
Maṇḍala
.
	
Central	Channel
	
rtsa	dbu-ma
,	Skt.	
avadhūti
	
See	
Energy	Channels
.
	
Chang-bu	Offerings
	
chang-bu
,	Skt.	
piṇḍa
Finger-pressed	 strands	 of	 dough,	 which	 are	 made	 as	 offerings	 to	 assuage
anuished	spirits
	and	to	appease	negative	forces.
	
Channel	Branch
	
rtsa-’dab
According	to	the	
tantras
	and	related	medical	traditions,	there	are	five	
energy
centres
	
located	along	the	
central	channel
	of	the	body	at	the	focal	points	of	the
crown,	throat,	heart,	navel	and	genitalia.	A	specific	number	of	channel	branches
(
rtsa-‘dab
)	emerges	from	each	of	these	energy	centres,	and	these	in	turn	conduct
vital	energy
	
throughout	the	body	through	a	network	of	72,000	minor	channels.
See	
Energy	Channels
.
	
Channel	of	Pristine	Cognition
	
ye-shes-kyi	dhūti
According	to	the	
tantras
,	the	channel	of	pristine	cognition	is	a	synonym	for	the
central	channel
	of	the	body.	See	
Vital	Energy
	
Chiliocosm
	
stong	dang-po	’jig-rten-gyi	khams
,	Skt.	
sahasralokadhātu
According	to	traditional	Indian	Buddhist	cosmology,	the	world	of	the	
four
continents
	
surrounding	
Mount
	
Sumeru
	when	multiplied	one	thousand	times
forms	a	chiliocosm	of	parallel	worlds	(
stong	dang-po
).	The	chiliocosm	when
multiplied	one	thousand	times	forms	a	larger	
dichiliocosm
	(
stong	gnyis-pa
),
which	 in	 turn	 when	 multiplied	 one	 thousand	 times	 forms	 an	 even	 larger
trichiliocosm	(
stong	gsum-pa
).	This	evolution	of	expanding	worlds	continues	to
enlarge	incrementally	until	the	inconceivably	vast	number	of	multiple	worlds	is
reached,	in	which	a	single	supreme	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
	is	said	to
function	simultaneously.
	

Citipati
	
dur-khrod	bdag-po	bdag-mo
The	
Citipati
	are	a	pair	of	male	and	female	acolytes	of	
Yama
,	lord	of	death,	who
are	depicted	as	two	skeletons	in	dancing	posture,	symbolising	the	rites	of	the
charnel	ground.
	
Cittamatra
	
sems-tsam-pa
One	of	the	four	major	Buddhist	philosophical	schools	of	ancient	India,	also
known	as	
Vijñānavāda
,	 and	 associated	 in	 some	 respects	 with	 the	
Yogācāra
tradition.	The	
Cittamātra
	(lit.	‘mind	only’)	school	founded	by	the	fourth-century
Indian	master	
Asaṅga
	propounds	an	idealist	or	phenomenalistic	view	of	the
world.	Its	main	tenet	is	that	all	phenomena	are	either	actual	mental	events	or
extensions	of	the	mind	and	the	mind	is	regarded	as	existing	as	a	substantially
real	entity.	In	addition,	the	school	propounds	that	there	exists	no	atomically
composed	 material	 world	 external	 to,	 or	 independent	 of,	 our	 perceptions.
According	to	the	
Cittamātra
	school	consciousness	itself	is	considered	to	be
eightfold,	 with	 the	
ground-of-all	 consciousness
	 as	 the	 foundation.	 See
Aggregate	of	Consciousness
.
	
Cittamatrin
	
sems	rtsam-pa-po
A	follower	of	the	
Cittamātra
	school.
	
Cvaṃcivaka
	
shang-shang
A	mythical	creature	with	the	head,	arms,	and	torso	of	a	human	being,	and	the
wings	and	legs	of	a	bird.	The	throne	of	the	male	
uddha
	Amoghasiddhi	assumes
the	form	of	a	
c
ῑ
vaṃc
ῑ
vaka
	bird.
	
Coemergent	 Delight
	
lhan-cig	 skyes-pa’i	 dga’-ba
,	 Skt.
sahajasukha/sahajānanda
The	coemergent	delight	is	one	of	the	
four	delights
	(
dga’-ba	bzhi
)	experienced
during	 the	
perfection	 stage
	 (
sampannakrama
)	 of	 meditation.	 See	
Four
Delights
.	It	is	said	that	the	coemergent	delight	is	also	naturally	experienced	at
the	moment	of	death	(see	Chapter	8)	and	at	the	moment	of	conception	(see
Chapter	11).
	
Coemergent	Ignorance
	
lhan-cig-skyes-pa’i	ma-rig-pa
,	Skt.	
sahajāvidyā
See	
Fundamental	Ignorance
.

	
Coemergent	Pristine	Cognition
	
lhan-skyes	ye-shes
,	Skt.	
sahajajñāna
The	natural	emergence	of	pristine	cognition	that	occurs	during	the	perfection
stage	of	meditation,	when	vital	energy	is	absorbed	within	the	central	channel	of
the	subtle	body.
	
Commitement
	
dam-tshig
,	Skt.	
samaya
A	sacred	commitment	or	pledge	taken	by	a	practitioner	which	is	a	prerequisite
for	the	practice	of	the	
tantras
.	The	Tibetan	‘
dam-tshig
’	literally	means	‘binding
word’,	indicating	that	the	person	becomes	bound	by	a	solemn	oath.	Each	class	of
tantra
	
has	its	own	categorisation	of	basic	and	ancillary	commitments,	which
complement	the	
prātimokṣa
	and	
bodhisattva
	
vows
	taken	by	those	who	uphold
the	
vinaya
	
and	the	
sūtra
	tradition	of	the	
Greater	Vehicule
	respectively.	See
Vows
.	
Samaya
	 may	 entail	 the	 observation	 of	 specific	 precepts	 which	 are
common	to	a	whole	class	of	
tantra
,	or	individual	precepts,	which	must	be
observed	in	relation	to	a	particular	
meditational	deity
.	When	such	commitments
are	broken	they	must	be	restored	through	appropriate	tantric	ritual	practices,	for
their	degeneration	may	cause	serious	hindrances	to	progress	on	the	path.	See
Chapter	7.
	
Commitments	of	Indestructible	Reality
	
rdo-rje	dam-tshig
,	Skt.	
vajrasamaya
A	synonym	for	the	
commitments
	in	general	which	are	undertaken	in	the	context
of	the	
Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality
(
Vajrayāna
).
	
Commitments	Undertaken	in	Respect	of	Reality
	
de-kho-na-nyid-kyi	 dam-
tshig
A	synonym	for	the	four	commitments	specific	to	the	practice	of	
Atiyoga
.
	
Compassion
	
snying-rje/thugs-rje
,	Skt.	
karunā
In	Buddhist	literature,	the	term	‘compassion’	is	often	used	as	a	synonym	for
‘great	compassion’	(
mahākarunā
),	which	refers	to	a	totally	unbiased	mind	that
aspires	 to	 the	
liberation
	 of	 all	
sentient	 beings
	 from	 suffering,	 equally.
Compassion	is	said	to	become	‘great’	only	when,	through	proper	training	of	the
mind
,	such	an	altruistic	aspiration	becomes	spontaneous	and	no	longer	requires
any	conscious	effort	for	its	arising.	The	measure	of	having	realised	such	a	state	is
that	one	spontaneously	feels	a	sense	of	intimacy	and	compassion	towards	all

others,	with	the	same	degree	of	commitment	and	intensity	that	one	feels	towards
one’s	most	beloved.	It	is	worth	bearing	in	mind	that	in	Buddhism,	compassion
should	 not	 be	 understood	 in	 terms	 of	 pity,	 which	 may	 imply	 a	 feeling	 of
superiority	toward	the	object	of	compassion.
	
Conceptual	Elaboration
	
spros-pa
,	Skt.	
prapañca
Conceptual	elaboration	refers	to	the	presence	of	discursive	or	conceptual	thought
processes,	 the	 absence	 of	 which	 (Skt.	
nisprapañca
,	 Tib.	
spros-bral
)	 is
characteristic	of	the	realisation	of	
emptiness
	or	
actual	reality
.
	
Confession	of	Negativity
	
sdig-pa’i	gshags-pa
,	Skt.	
pāpadeśanā
A	 spiritual	 practice	 which	 involves	 the	 disclosure	 and	 purification	 of
accumulated	
negative	actions.	The	successful	application	of	confession	must	be
undertaken	 within	 the	 framework	 of	 what	 are	 known	 as	 the	 four	 antidotal
powers.	For	an	explanation	of	these	see	the	introductory	context	to	Chapter	7.
	
Conqueror
	
rgyal-ba
,	Skt
.	jina
In	Buddhist	literature,	this	term	is	an	epithet	for	a	
buddha
,	indicating	the	victory
attained	by	a	
buddha
	over	
cyclic	existence
	(
samsāra
).	 In	 particular	 in	 the
context	of	this	book,	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	in	the	
maṇdala
	of
the	
Peacefuland	Wrathful	Deities
	 is	 described	 as	 represented	 by	 the	
‘five
enlightened	families
	of	the	conquerors’	(
rgyal-ba	rigs-lnga
),	where	the	five
male	
buddhas
,	in	both	peaceful	and	wrathful	forms,	are	known	as	the	five
conquerors.	
Vajradhara
,	an	aspect	of	the	primordial	
buddha	Samantabhadra
,
who	 represents	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality
,	 is	 also	 known	 as	 the	 ‘sixth
conqueror’	(
rgyal-ba	drug-pa
)	or	‘lord	of	the	sixth	
enlightened	family’
.	More
generally,	in	its	Tibetan	form,	this	same	epithet	is	frequently	used	as	an	honorific
title	before	the	names	of	highly	venerated	beings,	
e.g.
	
Gyalwa	Yizhin	Norbu
	(for
HH	the	
Dalai	Lama
),	or	
Gyalwa	Karmapa
.
	
Consciousness
	
rnam-par	shes-pa
,	Skt.	
vijñāna
In	Buddhism,	consciousness	is	defined	as	‘an	awareness	which	is	knowing	and
luminous’.	It	is	not	physical	and	thus	lacks	any	resistance	to	obstruction.	It	has
neither	shape	nor	colour;	it	can	be	experienced	but	not	externally	perceived	as	an
object.	 In	 short,	 it	 includes	 both	 the	 conscious	 cognitive	 events	 and	 the
subconscious	aspects	of	the	mind	through	which	we	know	and	perceive	the
world,	as	well	as	the	emotions.	A	distinction	is	made	between	the	mundane

consciousness	(
vijñāna
)	of	sentient	beings,	and	the	
pristine	cognition
	(
jñāna
)	of
the	
buddhas
.	See	
Pristine	Cognition
	and	
Aggregate	of	Consciousness
.
	
Consciousness	Transference
	
’pho-ba
,	Skt.	
samkrānti
A	unique	tantric	practice	undertaken	to	transfer	the	
consciousness
	at	the	time	of
death,	ideally	to	the	unconditioned	state	of	the	realisation	of	the	
Buddha-body
of	
Reality
,	or	to	a	realm	of	existence	with	a	favourable	migration,	ideally	the
pure	realm
	of	a	
meditational	deity.
	See	Chapter	10.
	
Continuum	of	the	Ground
	
gzhi’i	rgyud
,	Skt
.	āśrayatantra
The	continuum	of	the	ground	is	identified	with	the	primordially	present	intrinsic
awareness
,	and	the	
actual	reality
	or	
emptiness
,	which	is	in	harmony	with	the
fruitional	aspects	of	
buddhahood
.	According	to	the	
tantras
,	the	continuum	of
the	ground	(
gzhi’i	rgyud
)	is	the	basis	through	which	the	
continuum	of	the	path
(
lam-gyi	rgyud
)	fully	manifests	as	the	
continuum	of	the	result
	(
’bras-bu’i
rgyud
).
	
Continuum	of	the	Path
	
lam-gyi	rgyud
,	Skt
.	mārgatantra
According	to	the	
tantras
,	the	continuum	of	the	path	is	the	means	through	which
the	
continuum	of	the	ground
	(
gzhi’i	rgyud
)	becomes	fully	manifest	as	the
continuum	
of	the	result
	(
’bras-bu’i	rgyud
).
	
Continuum	of	the	Result
	
’bras-bu’i	rgyud
,	Skt
.	phalatantra
According	to	the	
tantras
,	the	continuum	of	the	result	is	the	fruition	or	conclusion
attained	 when	 the	
continuum	 of	 the	 ground
	 (
gzhi’i	 rgyud
)	 becomes	 fully
manifest	through	the	
continuum	of	the	path
	(
lam-gyi	rgyud
).
	
Copper-coloured	Mountain
	
zangs-mdog	dpal-ri
,	Skt.	
Tāmraśr
ῑ
parvata
A	sacred	abode	located	on	the	subcontinent	
Cāmaradv
ῑ
pa
	(
rnga-yab	gling
),
where	
Padmasambhava
	is	said	to	currently	reside	in	an	awesome	rainbow-light
form.
	
Core-penetrating
	
zang-thal
See	
Ascending	and	Core-penetrating
.
	
Cutting	through	Resistance
	
khregs-chod

According	to	the	pith	or	esoteric	instructions	(
man-ngag-gi	sde
)	of	the	
Great
Perfection
	
(
Atiyoga
)	there	are	two	meditative	techniques,	which	are	engaged	in
successively.	The	first,	Cutting	through	Resistance	(
khregs-chod
)	focuses	on	the
recognition	of	
primordial	purity
	(
ka-dag
),	the	nature	of	
awareness
	(
rig-pa
),
through	 which	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality
	 is	 attained.	 The	 second,	
All-
surpassing	Realisation
	
(
thod-rgal
	),	focuses	on	the	recognition	of	
spontaneous
presence
	 (
lhun-grub
),	 eliciting	 and	 recognising	 the	 radiances	 of	
pristine
cognition
	 and	 the	 purity	 of	 our	 psycho-physical	
aggregates
	 and	
elements
,
through	which	the	rainbow-like	
Buddha-body	of	Form
	is	attained.	In	
All-
surpassing	 Realisation
	 practice,	 once	 a	 stable	 realisation	 of	 the	 nature	 of
awareness
	 has	 been	 attained	 through	 Cutting	 through	 Resistance,	 all
phenomenal	appearances	are	liberated	through	a	spontaneous	realisation	of	their
essential	modality	as	
inner	radiance
.	Cutting	through	Resistance	is	the	subject
matter	of	Chapter	4	of	the	present	work.	The	introduction	to	the	
intermediate
state	 of	 reality
,	 in	 Chapter	 11	 of	 our	 text,	 is	 illustrative	 of	 the	 esoteric
instructions	on	
All-surpassing	Realisation
,	which	is	the	pinnacle	of	meditative
practice	according	to	the	
Nyingma
	school.
	
Cyclic	Existence
	
’khor-ba
,	Skt.	
samsāra
A	state	of	existence	conditioned	by	
dissonant	mental	states
	and	the	imprint	of
past	actions
	(
karma
),	characterised	by	suffering	in	a	cycle	of	life,	death	and
rebirth,	in	which	the	
six	classes	of	sentient	beings
	(
ṣaḍgati
;	Tib.	
’gro-ba	rigs-
drug
)	rotate.	Cyclic	existence	emerges	from	
fundamental	ignorance
	(
avidyā
)
through	 a	 process	 known	 as	 the	
twelve	 links	 of	 dependent	 origination
(
dvādaśāṅga-prat
ῑ
tyasamutpāda
	
).	When	
fundamental	ignorance
,	identified	as
the	misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	
actual	reality
	(
dharmatā
),	is	reversed,
cyclic	existence	is	itself	reversed,	and	the	contrasting	state	of	
nirvāṇa
	is	attained,
free	from	suffering	and	the	processes	of	rebirth.	See	
Dependent	Origination
and	Nirvāṇa.
	
Ḍākinī
	
mkha’-’gro-ma
Ḍākin
ῑ
	are	female	
yogin
ῑ
	who	have	attained	either	mundane	or	supramundane
spiritual	
accomplishments
	(
siddhi
),	the	latter	referring	to	the	realisations	of
buddhahood
	
.	They	may	be	human	beings	who	have	achieved	such	attainments,
or	 manifestations	 of	 the	 enlightened	 activity	 of	
meditational	 deities
.	 The
Tibetan	 equivalent	
mkha’-’gro
	 literally	 means	 ‘space	 voyager’,	 space
metaphorically	implying	
emptiness,
	
and	voyager	indicating	someone	immersed

in	its	experience.	The	
ḍākin
ῑ
	are	said	to	confer	enlightened	or	
buddha-activities
on	the	meditator,	in	contrast	to	the	
spiritual	teacher
	who	confers	
blessings
	and
the	
meditatioal	deity
	who	confers	
accomplishments
.
	
Ḍākinī	of	Pristine	Cognition
	
ye-shes	mkha’-’gro
,	Skt.	
jñānaḍākin
ῑ
The	female	consorts	of	the	principal	
awareness	holders
	of	maturation,	power
over	the	lifespan,	the	Great	Seal	and	spontaneous	presence.
	
Ḍākinī	of	the	Three	Abodes
	
gnas-gsum	mkha’-’gro
The	
ḍākin
ῑ
	of	the	three	abodes	are	those	of	
buddha-body
,	
speech
	and	
mind
.
	
Dalai	Lama
	
rgyal	ba	yid-bzhin	nor-bu/rin-po-che
The	temporal	and	spiritual	leader	of	Tibet.	The	
Dalai	Lama’s
	temporal	reign
began	at	the	time	of	the	fifth	
Dalai	Lama
	in	the	17th	century.	Since	then	the
country	has	been	ruled,	periodically,	by	a	succession	of	
Dalai	Lamas
,	until
China’s	occupation	in	the	1950s.	The	
Dalai	Lamas
	are	chosen	according	to	a
strict	traditional	procedure	of	observation	and	examination	initiated	following
the	death	of	the	previous	
Dalai	Lama
.	The	present	
Dalai	Lama
	is	the	fourteenth
in	the	succession	of	this	lineage.	The	title	
Dalai	Lama
	was	originally	offered	to
Sonam	Gyatso
,	the	third	
Dalai	Lama
,	by	the	then	Mongol	prince	
Altan	Qan
.	The
Mongol	word	
da-lai
	(Tib.	
rgya-mtsho
)	means	‘ocean	(of	wisdom)’.
	
Ḍāmaru
	
ḍā-ma-ru
A	hand-held	double-sided	drum,	frequently	identified	with	the	
wrathful	deities
and	the	
ḍākin
ῑ
,	and	generally	utilised	as	a	ritual	instrument	in	conjunction	with
the	bell.	The	
ḍāmaru
	is	said	to	proclaim	‘the	sound	of	great	bliss’.
	
Dedication	of	Merit
	
bsngo-ba
,	Skt.	
pariṇāma
An	important	element	of	Buddhist	practice	enacted	normally	in	the	form	of	a
recitation	of	verses	of	dedication	at	the	conclusion	of	a	spiritual	practice.	In	all
Buddhist	practices,	the	establishment	of	the	correct	motivation	at	the	beginning
and	the	altruistic	dedication	at	the	end	are	regarded	as	highly	significant.	The
most	 popular	 objects	 of	 the	 dedication	 are	 the	 flourishing	 of	 the	
sacred
teachings
	 of	 Buddhism	 throughout	 the	 universe	 and	 the	 attainment	 of	 full
enlightenment
	by	all	
sentient	beings
.
	

Definitive	Meaning
	
nges-don
,	Skt
.	n
ῑ
tārtha
The	
sūtra
	teachings	of	the	
buddhas
	are	classified	as	being	of	either	definitive
meaning	or	provisional	meaning	(
neyārtha
)	depending	on	whether	they	do	not	or
do	 require	 further	 interpretation.	 In	 general,	
sūtras
	 of	 provisional	 meaning
concern	the	nature	of	
cyclic	existence
	(
samsāra
)	and	its	antidotes,	as	expounded
by	
Śākyamuni	 Buddha
	
in	 the	 first	
turning	 of	 the	 wheel	 of	 the	 sacred
teachings
.	By	contrast,	those	
sūtras
	of	definitive	meaning	concern	either	the
nature	of	
emptiness
,	as	expressed	in	the	second	
turning	of	the	wheel	of	the
sacred	 teachings
,	 or	 the	 explications	 on	
buddha	 nature
	
and	
buddha-
attributes
,	 as	 expressed	 in	 the	 third	
turning	 of	 the	 wheel	 of	 the	 sacred
teachings
.	 There	 are	 divergent	 views	 in	 the	 various	 schools	 of	 Tibetan
Buddhism	as	to	which	of	the	
sūtras
	of	the	second	and	third	turnings	should	be
regarded	as	definitive	or	provisional.
	
Degenerate	Age
	
snyigs-ma’i	dus
,	Skt.	
kaliyuga
According	to	the	prevailing	view	of	Indian	cosmology,	a	period	of	cosmic	or
cyclical	 time	 (
aeon
,	 Skt.	
kalpa
)	 comprises	 fourteen	 secondary	 cycles	 (Skt.
manvantara
),	each	of	which	lasts	306,720,000	years.	Each	secondary	cycle	is
said	to	contain	seventy-one	‘great	ages’	(Skt.	
mahāyuga
),	and	each	of	these	is
further	 subdivided	 into	 four	 ages	 (Skt.	
caturyuga
)	 which	 are	 of	 decreasing
duration,	and	known	respectively	as	the	Perfect	Age	(
kṛtayuga
),	the	Third	Age
(
tretāyuga
),	the	Second	Age	(
dvāparayuga
	
),	and	the	Black	or	Degenerate	Age
(
kaliyuga
).	Since	these	four	ages	represent	a	gradual	decline	in	meritorious
activities,	special	meditative	practices	and	spiritual	antidotes	are	associated	with
each	in	turn.	Specifically,	the	Perfect	Age	is	most	suited	
to	the	practice	of	the
Kriyātantra
;	the	Third	Age	to	that	of	the	
Caryātantra
;	the	Second	Age	to	that	of
the	
Yogatantra
;	 and	 the	 present	 Black	 or	 Degenerate	 Age	 to	 that	 of	 the
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantra
.
	
Deity
	
yi-dam
,	Skt.	
iṣṭadevatā
See	under	
Meditational	Deity
.
	
Delusion
	
gti-mug
,	Skt.	
moha
One	of	the	
three	poisons
	(
dug-gsum
)	along	with	
aversion
	and	
attachment
,	or
five	poisons
	(
dug-lnga
)	along	with	
aversion
,	
attachment
,	 pride,	 and	 envy,
which	perpetuate	the	
sufferings
	of	
cyclic	existence
.	Delusion	is	the	obfuscating
mental	 factor	 which	 obstructs	 an	 individual	 from	 generating	 knowledge	 or

insight,	and	it	is	said	to	be	characteristic	of	the	animal	world	in	general.
	
Dense	Array
	
gtug-po	bkod-pa
,	Skt.	
Ghanavyūha
The	Dense	Array	is	a	synonym	for	the	central	
buddha	field
	of	
Akaniṣṭha
.	See
under	
Akaniṣṭha
.
	
Dependent	Origination
	
rten-’brel
,	Skt.	
prat
ῑ
tyasamutpāda
The	doctrine	of	dependent	origination	can	be	said	to	be	the	most	fundamental
metaphysical	view	of	Buddhist	thought	and	it	is	intimately	linked	with	the
Buddhist	notion	of	causation.	The	principle	of	dependent	origination	asserts	that
nothing	exists	independently	of	other	factors,	the	reason	for	this	being	that	things
and	 events	 come	 into	 existence	 only	 by	 dependence	 on	 the	 aggregation	 of
multiple	causes	and	conditions.	In	general,	the	processes	of	
cyclic	existence
,
through	which	the	external	world	and	the	
sentient	beings
	within	it	revolve	in	a
continuous	cycle	of	
suffering
,	propelled	by	the	
propensities
	of	
past	actions
	and
their	interaction	with	
dissonant	mental	states
,	are	said	to	originate	dependent
on	twelve	successive	links,	which	are	known	as	the	
twelve	links	of	dependent
origination	(
dvādaśāṅga-prat
ῑ
tyasamutpāda
	
).	These	comprise:	1)	
fundamental
ignorance
,	2)	
motivational	tendencies
,	3)	
consciousness
,	4)	name	and	form,	5)
sensory	activity	fields
,	6)	contact,	7)	
sensation
	
,	8)	
attachment
,	9)	grasping,
10)	rebirth	process,	11)	birth,	12)	ageing	and	death.	Although,	in	the	ultimate
sense	there	is	no	beginning	to	the	continuum	of	
mind
,	a	relative	beginning	can
be	spoken	of	on	the	basis	of	a	single	instance	of	rebirth	within	
cyclic	existence
.
Every	instance	of	birth	in	
cyclic	existence
	must	have	a	cause	and	such	causes	are
ultimately	rooted	in	our	
fundamental	ignorance
,	which	misapprehends	the	true
nature	of	
actual	reality
.	For	an	ordinary	
sentient	being
	all	the	twelve	links	are
interconnected	and	each	component	of	the	chain	contributes	to	the	perpetuation
of	the	cycle.	It	is	only	through	deliberate	reversal	of	
fundamental	ignorance
that	one	can	succeed	in	bringing	the	whole	cycle	to	an	end.	
Fundamental
ignorane
	(
avidyā
)	gives	rise	to	conditioning	or	tendencies	(
saṃskāra
)	which	are
stored	 in	 the	 substratum	 or	
ground-of-all	 consciousness
	 (
ālayavijñāna
).
Following	the	moment	of	a	sentient	being’s	conception,	this	inheritance	of	past
actions	from	a	previous	life	gives	rise	to	name	and	form	(
nāmarūpa
),	
i.e.
	to	the
five	psycho-physical	
aggregates	(
pañcaskandha
),	which	are	products	of	that
dualising	consciousness.	Then,	the	sensory	activity	fields	(
āyatana
)	provide	the
subjective	and	objective	framework	for	sensory	activity	in	its	initial	stages	of
development;	 while	 contact	 (
sparśa
)	 refers	 to	 the	 maturation	 of	 sensory

perception	as	an	unborn	child	develops	a	sensitivity	to	its	environment	inside	the
womb.	Thereafter,	sensation	(
vedanā
),	
attachment
	(
tṛṣṇā
),	grasping	(
ādāna
),
rebirth	process	(
bhava
),	and	actual	birth	(	
jāti
)	
together	indicate	the	emergence
of	a	
sentient	being
	within	the	living	world;	and	these	in	turn	lead	inevitably	to
old	age	and	death	(
jarāmaraṇa
).
	
Desire
	
’dod-chags
,	Skt.	
rāga
See	
Attachment
.
	
Desire	Realm
,	Skt.	
kāmadhātu
See	
Three	World-sytems.
	
Dhanakośa
	
dha-na-ko-sa
The	name	of	an	island	lake	situated	in	the	country	of	
Oḍḍiyāna
,	generally
identified	in	the	Tibetan	tradition	with	the	Swat	Valley	of	modern	Pakistan,
where	many	of	the	Buddhist	
tantras
	were	once	disseminated	and	practised.	It	is
considered	to	have	been	the	birthplace	of	both	
Prahevajra
,	the	first	human
lineage	holder
	of	
Atiyoga
,	and	of	
Padmasambhava
.
	
Dharmarāja
	
chos-rgyal
See	under	
Yama	Dharmarāja
.
	
Discriminative	Awareness
	
shes-rab
,	Skt.	
prajñā
The	Sanskrit	term	
prajñā
	is	formally	defined	as	‘the	discriminative	awareness	of
the	essence,	distinctions,	particular	and	general	characteristics,	and	advantages
and	 disadvantages	 of	 any	 object	 within	 one’s	 own	 perceptual	 range,	 at	 the
conclusion	of	which	doubts	are	removed’.	In	other	words,	this	is	the	faculty	of
intelligence	or	discriminating	awareness	inherent	within	the	mental	continuum
of	all	living	creatures	which	enables	them	to	examine	the	characteristics	of
things	and	events,	thus	making	it	possible	to	make	judgements	and	deliberations.
The	term	
prajñā
	has	commonly	been	translated	into	English	as	‘wisdom’,	largely
following	the	example	of	Edward	Conze,	who	translated	a	voluminous	series	of
texts	devoted	to	the	
Perfection	of	Discriminative	Awareness
	(
Prajñāpāramitā
).
According	to	the	
abhidharma
	
of	the	
Lesser	Vehicule
,	
prajñā
	is	one	of	the	five
mental	 factors	 of	 ascertainment	 which	 arise	 during	 all	 mental	 events	 of	 a
veridical	nature.	According	to	the	
Greater	Vehicule
,	 the	 perfection	 of	 this

faculty	of	discriminative	awareness	(
prajñāpāramitā
	
)	leads	a	
bodhisattva
	to	a
total	overcoming	of	all	types	of	doubt	and	ignorance	and	to	the	realisation	of	the
emptiness
	of	all	things.	Here,	in	conjunction	with	
skilful	means
	(
upāya
),	the
term	
prajñopāya
	refers	to	the	integration	of	the	two	principal	aspects	of	the	path
to	
enlightenment
.	In	this	context	
prajñā
,	or	true	insight	into	the	
emptiness
	of	all
phenomena,	is	united	in	perfect	union	with	
skilful	means
.	In	tantric	traditions,
the	union	of	
prajñopāya
	is	often	depicted	iconographically	in	the	union	of	the
male	and	female	deities,	and	in	the	symbolic	hand-implements	such	as	the	
vajra
and	the	bell.
	
Dissonant	Mental	States
	
nyonmongs
,	Skt.	
kleśa
The	essentially	pure	nature	of	
mind
	is	obscured	and	afflicted	by	the	various
psychological	defilements	known	as	the	dissonant	mental	states.	The	Tibetan
word	
nyonmongs
	
implies	a	mental	event	whose	arising	causes	psychological
afflictions	within	the	
mind
,	thus	destroying	its	peace	and	composure.	According
to	
abhidharma
	
literature	in	general,	there	are	six	primary	dissonant	mental
states:	
fundamental	 ignorance
,	
attachment
,	
aversion
,	 pride,	 doubt,	 and
afflicted	or	dissonant	views;	and	an	enumeration	of	twenty	subsidiary	mental
states	(Skt.	
upakleśa
),	which	comprise:	anger,	malice,	dissimulation,	fury,	envy,
miserliness,	dishonesty,	deception,	arrogance,	mischief,	indecorum,	indecency,
obfuscation,	agitation,	distrust,	laziness,	
carelessness,	forgetfulness,	distraction,
and	inattentiveness.	Even	more	wide-ranging	are	the	84,000	dissonant	mental
states	for	which	the	84,000	aspects	of	the	
sacred	teachings
	are	said	to	provide
distinctive	antidotes.	At	the	root	of	all	these	psychological	afflictions	lies	the
fundamental	ignorance
	which	misapprehends	the	true	nature	of	
reality
.
	
Downfalls
	
ltung-ba
,	Skt.	
āpatti
See	
Transgressions
.
	
Dream	Yoga
	
rmi-lam
Meditative	techniques	for	utilising	and	transforming	dream	consciousness	within
the	 context	 of	
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantra
	 practice.	 These	 include:	 meditative
techniques	 for	 retaining	 awareness	 during	 the	 dream	 state;	 multiplying	 and
transforming	the	contents	of	dreams	and	recognising	their	actual	nature;	and	the
dispelling	of	obstacles	which	prevent	maintaining	awareness	in	the	dream	state.
	
Dualism
	
gnyis-snang
,	Skt.	
ubhayābhāsa

Any	level	of	perception	of	duality.	Buddhist	thought	describes	various	forms	of
dualism,	principal	amongst	these	being:	1)	a	dualistic	perception	of	subject	and
object;	 2)	 all	 appearances	 of	
inherent	 existence
;	 3)	 all	 appearances	 of
conventionalities	;	and	4)	all	forms	of	conceptuality.	A	genuine	direct	
realisation
of	
emptiness
	
is	non-dual,	in	that	it	is	free	from	all	the	above	forms	of	dualism.
	
Dzogchen
	
rdzogs-chen
,	Skt.	
mahāsandhi
See	
Great	Perfection
.
	
Eight	Charnel	Grounds
	
dur-khrod	brgyad
The	eight	charnel	grounds	are	the	great	cemeteries	of	ancient	India,	which	are
regarded	 as	 inspirational	 places	 for	 the	 practice	 of	 meditation.	 These	 are
respectively	known,	in	Tibetan	translation,	as	Tumdrak	(
gtum-drag
),	Tsangtsing
Trikpa	 (
tshangtshing	 ’khrigs-pa
),	 Bar	 Trikpa	 (
’bar	 ’khrigs-pa
),	 Kengruchen
(
keng-rus-can
),	Silbutsel	(
bsil-bu-tshal
,	Skt.	
Ś
ῑ
tavana
),	Munpa	Nagpo	(
mun-pa
nag-po
),	Kili	Kilir	Dradrokpa	(
ki-li	ki-lir	sgra-sgrog-pa
),	and	Haha	Godpa	(
ha-
ha	rgod-pa
).
	
Eight	Classes	of	Consciousness
	
rnam-shes	tshogs/gnas-brgyad
See	under	
Aggregate	of	Consciousness
.
	
Eight	Classes	of	Spirits
	
sde-brgyad
A	classification	of	the	malign	forces	that	can	be	appeased	by	specific	offerings
and	rituals.	Diverse	enumerations	of	these	malign	forces	have	been	made	by
Nubchen	Sangye	Yeshe
.	Accordingly,	there	is	an	outer	eightfold	group	(
phyi-yi
sde	brgyad
),	an	inner	eightfold	group	(
nang-gi	sde	brgyad
),	a	secret	eightfold
group	 (
gsang-ba’i	 sde	 brgyad
),	 a	 supreme	 eightfold	 group	 (
mchog-gi	 sde
brgyad
),	 an	 emanational	 eightfold	 group	 (
sprul-pa’i	 sde	 brgyad
),	 and	 a
phenomenal	eightfold	group	(
snangsrid	sde	brgyad
).
	
Eight	Extremes
	
mtha’-brgyad
,	Skt.	
aṣṭānta
The	eight	extremes	from	which	
intinsic	awareness
	is	free	are	those	enumerated
by	
Nāgārjuna
	in	the	
Root	Stanzas	of	the	Madhyamaka	entitled	Discriminative
Awareness
	(
Prajñānāma	mūlamadhyamakakārikā
,	T	3824),	namely:	cessation
(
’gag-pa
),	creation	or	production	(
skye-ba
),	nihilism(
chad-pa
),	
eternalism
	(
rtag-
pa
),	coming	(
’ong-ba
),	going	(
’gro-ba
),	diversity	(
tha-dad-pa
),	and	singularity

(
gcig-pa
).
	
Eight	Freedoms	and	Ten	Opportunities
	
dal-ba	brgyad	dang	’byor-ba	bcu
Birth	as	a	human	being	with	the	freedom	and	opportunity	to	follow	the	Buddhist
path	 is	 regarded	 as	 difficult	 to	 attain	 and	 a	 precious	 circumstance.	 In	 the
preliminary	practices
	of	the	
tantra
	path,	in	order	to	establish	an	appreciation
for	 the	 significance	 of	 human	 rebirth,	 the	 freedom	 one	 has	 from	 eight
unfavourable	rebirths	is	a	focus	of	contemplation,	together	with	contemplation
of	the	ten	favourable	opportunities.	The	eight	freedoms	are	the	freedoms	from
the	following	eight	states:	birth	in	the	
hells
,	birth	as	an	
anguished	spirit
,	birth	as
an	animal,	birth	as	an	uncivilised	or	barbarous	person,	birth	as	a	long-living	
god
,
birth	 into	 a	 society	 that	 holds	 mistaken	 beliefs,	 birth	 in	 an	 age	 devoid	 of
Buddhism,	 and	 birth	 with	 limited	 faculties.	 Among	 the	 ten	 favourable
opportunities,	there	are	five	which	are	personally	acquired	and	five	which	are
contingent	on	external	factors.	The	former	comprise	the	favourable	opportunities
of	being	born	as	a	human	being,	in	a	civilised	society,	with	perfect	sense-
faculties,	not	being	engaged	in	a	conflicting	lifestyle,	and	having	confidence	in
Buddhism.	The	latter	comprise	the	favourable	opportunities	of	being	born	in	an
aeon
	when	a	
buddha
	has	appeared,	when	the	sacred	teachings	have	been	taught,
when	they	are	still	being	practised,	and	when	one	actively	engages	in	their
practice,	and	finds	a	qualified	
spiritual	friend
	(
kalyānamitra
).	See	Chapter	1.
	
Eight	[Great]	Fears
	
’jigs-pa	brgyad
,	Skt.	
aṣṭabhaya
These	 are	 variously	 enumerated	 but	 often	 include:	 drowning,	 fires,	 thieves,
captivity,	lions,	snakes,	elephants,	and	spirits.
	
Eight	Great	Projectresses
	
spor-byed	chen-mo	brgyad
The	eight	great	projectresses	are	female	deities	representing	forces	that	propel
various	classes	of	
sentient	beings
	to	exalted	rebirths	during	the	
intermediate
state	of	reality
.	See	Chapter	6.
	
Eight	Objects	[of	Consciousness]
	
[rnam-shes-kyi]	yul	brgyad
These	are	the	objects	of	the	eight	classes	of	consciousness,	
i.e.
	deep-seated
habitual	tendencies
	 (ground-of-all	 consciousness),	
dissonant	 mental	 states
(deluded	 consciousness),	 thoughts	 (mental	 consciousness),	 sights	 (visual
consciousness),	 objects	 of	 taste	 (gustatory	 consciousness),	 sounds	 (auditory
consciousness),	smells	(olfactory	consciousness)	and	physical	objects	(tactile

consciousness).	See	under	
Aggregate	of	Consciousness
.
	
Eight	Sensory	Objects
	
yul	brgyad
See	
Eight	Objects	of	Consciousness
.
	
Eighteen	Hells
	
dmyal-ba	bco-brgyad
,	Skt.	
aṣṭadaśanaraka
States	of	existence	within	the	cycle	of	rebirth,	conditioned	by	our	past	actions,
where	the	experience	of	
suffering
,	arising	from	hatred,	anger	and	fear,	is	most
intense	and	extended.	
Abhidharma
	literature	mentions	two	main	types	of	such
hell-like	existences,	characterised	by	the	dominance	of	either	freezing	coldness
or	burning	heat.	These	two	are	in	turn	divided	into	eighteen	subcategories.
	
Eight	Minor	Marks
	
dpe-byad	brgyad-cu
,	Skt.	
as
ῑ
tyanuvyañjana
See	
Major	and	Minor	Marks
.
	
Eight-four	Thousand	Aspects	of	the	[Sacred]	Teaching
	
chos-sgo	brgyad-khri
bzhi	stong
The	
Buddha
’s	teachings	are	said	to	comprise	eighty-four	thousand	aspects	or
approaches,	when	they	are	classified	according	to	their	function	as	an	antidote.	It
is	said	that	there	are	eighty-four	thousand	
dissonant	mental	states
,	comprising
twenty-one	 thousand	 aspects	 respectively	 of	
attachment
	 (
rāga
),	
aversion
(
dveśa
),	
delusion
	(
moha
),	and	their	combination;	and	there	is	an	antidote	within
the	
Buddha
’s	teachings	corresponding	to	each	of	these	
dissonant	mental	states
.
	
Elemental	Forces
	
’byung-po
,	Skt.	bhūta
A	category	of	forces	associated	with	the	elements:	earth,	water,	fire,	wind	and
space,	which	are	said	to	move	through	the	body	in	a	monthly	cycle	and	to	whom
certain	illnesses	and	paediatric	disorders	are	attributed	in	Tibetan	medicine.
These	may	be	appeased	or	brought	back	into	balance	by	the	application	of
medicinal	antidotes,	or	by	the	counteracting	rituals	prescribed	in	the	
tantras
,	as
outlined	in	Chapter	9.
	
Elements	/	Elemental	Properties
	
’byung	ba
,	Skt.	
bhūta
See	
Five	Elements
.
	
Eleven	Vehicles
	
theg-pa	bcu-gcig

See	
Vehicle
.
	
EMA
	
e-ma
Identical	to	
EMAHO
.
	
EMAHO
	
e-ma-ho
An	exclamation	of	great	wonder	or	astonishment.
	
Empowerment
	
dbang-bskur
,	Skt.	
abhiṣeka
A	ritual	ceremony	performed	by	accomplished	
spiritual	teachers
	and	
lineage
holders
	
to	empower	prospective	trainees,	prior	to	their	engaging	in	the	various
vehicles	and	specific	practices	of	the	
tantras
.	The	meditative	processes	of	the
empowerment	ritual	are	intended	to	activate	the	potentials	inherent	within	the
body,	speech	and	mind	of	the	trainee,	in	other	words	to	awaken	the	seed	of	the
natural	ability	to	engage	in	the	practice.	Such	empowerment	ceremonies	are	an
essential	prerequisite	for	the	practice	of	
tantra
	in	the	Buddhist	tradition.	See	also
Four	Empowerments.
	
Emptiness
	
stong-pa-nyid
,	Skt.	
śūnyatā
The	ultimate	nature	of	
reality
.	According	to	the	
Madhyamaka
	school	it	is	the
total	 absence	 of	
inherent	 existence
	 and	 self-identity	 with	 respect	 to	 all
phenomena.	 Its	 synonyms	 include	
ultimate	 truth
	 (Skt.	
paramārthasatya
),
actual	reality
	(Skt.	
dharmatā
	
),	and	suchness	(Skt.	
tathatā
).	Though	presented
in	the	scriptures	of	both	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
	and	the	
Greater	Vehicle,
	the	theory
of	emptiness	is	most	systematically	developed	in	the	writings	of	the	second-
century	Buddhist	thinker	
Nāgārjuna
,	the	founder	of	the	
Madhyamaka
	school.
According	to	this	view,	all	things	and	events,	both	external	and	internal,	are
devoid	 of	 any	 independent,	 intrinsic	 reality	 that	 constitutes	 their	 essence.
Nothing	can	be	said	to	exist	independently	from	the	complex	network	of	factors
that	 gives	 rise	 to	 their	 origination,	 nor	 are	 phenomena	 independent	 of	 the
cognitive	processes	and	conceptual	designations	(mental	constructs)	that	make
up	the	conventional	framework	within	which	their	identity	and	existence	are
posited.	It	is	our	deeply	ingrained	tendency	to	conceive	of	things	as	materially
existing	in	their	own	right	that	conditions	and	compels	us	to	perceive	
and	grasp
at	a	substantial	reality	of	things	and	our	own	existence.	In	turn,	when	all	levels
of	conceptualisation	dissolve	and	when	all	forms	of	dichotomising	tendencies
are	 quelled	 through	 deliberate	 meditative	 deconstruction	 of	
conceptual

elaborations
,	
Nāgārjuna
	argues,	the	ultimate	nature	of	reality	-	the	emptiness	-
will	finally	become	manifest	to	the	person.	Although	the	term	is	known	also	in
the	literature	of	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
,	it	is	in	the	philosophical	tenets	of	the
Madhyamaka
	school	that	the	different	interpretations	of	emptiness	were	greatly
elaborated.	See	
Madhyamaka
.
	
Energy	Centre
	
rtsa-’khor
,	Skt.	
cakra
According	to	the	
tantras
	and	related	medical	traditions,	there	are	five	energy
centres	within	the	
subtle	body
.	These	are	located	at	the	crown,	throat,	heart,
navel	and	genitalia,	where	the	right	and	left	channels	are	said	to	loop	around	the
central	channel	(
avadhūti
),	forming	knots	(
rtsa-mdud
)	which	obstruct	the	flow	of
subtle	energy	into	the	central	channel.	At	each	of	the	five	energy	centres,	there
are	a	diverse	number	of	
channel	branches
	(
rtsa-’dab
),	through	which	vital
energy	is	conducted	throughout	the	body.
	
Energy	Channels
	
rtsa
,	Skt.	
nāḍ
ῑ
In	the	
tantras
	and	related	medical	traditions,	it	is	said	that	there	are	72,000	vein-
like	channels	through	which	flow	the	
vital	energies
	or	subtle	winds	(
rlung
,	Skt.
vāyu
)	that	sustain	life	and	which	also	give	rise	to	various	conceptual	states
within	the	individual’s	mind.	Three	main	channels	run	vertically	from	the	crown
fontanelle	of	the	head	down	to	the	genitalia,	intersecting	at	the	five	
energy
centres
	(Skt.	
cakra
)	of	the	crown,	throat,	heart,	navel	and	genitalia.	All	the
minor	energy	channels	branch	off	from	these	
energy	centres
	to	permeate	the
body.	Among	the	three	main	channels,	the	one	to	the	left	is	known	as	the	
rkyang-
ma
	(Skt.	
lalanā
),	the	one	to	the	right	as	the	
ro-ma
	(Skt.	
rasanā
),	and	the	central
channel	as	the	
dbu-ma
	(Skt.	
avadhūti
).
	
Enlightened	Family
	
rigs
,	Skt
.	gotra/kula
This	term	may	render	either	the	Sanskrit	
gotra
,	in	which	case	it	is	synonymous
with	
buddha	nature
,	or	the	Sanskrit	
kula
,	in	which	case	it	refers	to	the	five
families	(Skt.	
pañcakula
)	into	which	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	are
grouped.	 See	 the	 individual	 entries	 under	
Buddha	 Family
,	
Vajra	 Family
,
Ratna	Family
,	
Padma	Family
	
and	
Karma	Family
	and	Appendix	Two.
	
Enlightened	Intention
	
dgongs-pa
,	Skt.	
abhiprāya
In	the	context	of	our	text,	enlightened	intention	refers	to	the	unimpeded,	non-
conceptual	and	compassionate	intention	of	the	
buddhas
,	whether	or	not	it	is

clearly	discerned	by	an	observer.
	
Enlightenment
	
byang-chub
,	Skt.	
bodhi
In	the	Buddhist	context,	‘enlightenment’	refers	to	an	individual’s	awakening	to
the	 mind’s	 actual	 nature.	 The	 Tibetan	 equivalent	
byang-chub
	 implies	 the
purification
	
(
byang
)	of	
obscurations
	and	the	perfection	(
chub
)	of	
omniscience
.
The	process	of	attaining	enlightenment	therefore	proceeds	in	conjunction	with
the	dispelling	of	the	
dissonant	mental	states
	which	obscure	the	perception	of
actual	 reality
.	 On	 the	
bodhisattva
	 path,	 thirty-seven	 distinct	 aspects	 of
enlightenment	are	sequentially	cultivated.	A	fully	enlightened	being	is	a	
buddha
who	is	totally	free	from	all	obstruction	to	true	knowledge	and	the	state	of
liberation
,	and	is	hence	
omniscient
	
in	the	knowledge	of	
reality
.
	
Enrichment
	
rgyas-pa’i	las
,	Skt
.	puṣṭikriyā
See	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened	Activity
	and	
Buddha-activties
.
	
Envy
	
phrag-dog
,	Skt.	
ῑ
rṣā
Envy,	which	includes	all	the	various	forms	of	self-cherishing	ambition,	is	one	of
the	
five	poisons
	of	the	mind	(
dug-lnga
),	along	with	
aversion
,	
delusion
,	pride,
and	
attachment
.	 In	 its	 extreme	 manifestation,	 of	 persistent	 hostile
competitiveness,	it	is	said	to	characterise	the	worlds	of	the	
antigods
	(
asuraloka
).
	
Equanimity
	
btang-snyoms
,	Skt.	
upekṣā
Equanimity	is	one	of	the	
four	immeasurable	aspirations
,	along	with	
loving
kindness
,	
compassion
	 and	 empathetic	 joy,	 which	 are	 cultivated	 in	 the
preliminary	 practices
	
and	 commonly	 repeated	 before	 engaging	 in	 daily
practice.	Equanimity	is	an	essential	element	of	the	cultivation	of	the	
altruistic
intention	to	attain	enlightenment
	for	the	benefit	of	others,	in	the	context	of
which	 the	 practitioner	 cultivates	 an	 unbiased	 attitude	 towards	 all	
sentient
beings
,	regarding	them	as	being	completely	equal	and	thus	overcoming	any
sense	of	partiality	towards	them.	Normally	one’s	attitude	towards	other	persons,
for	 example,	 is	 strongly	 prejudiced	 by	 one’s	 classification	 of	 others	 into
seemingly	 incompatible	 groups	 of	 friends,	 enemies	 or	 those	 regarded	 with
indifference.	See	also	under	
Bodhicitta
.
	
Esoteric	Instructional	Class
	
man-ngag-gi	sde
,	Skt.	
upadeśavarga

See	under	
Great	Perfection
.
	
Essence,	Natural	Expression	and	Compassionate	Energy
	
ngo-bo	rang-bzhin
thugs-rje
In	the	terminology	of	the	
Great	Perfection
,	the	essence	(
ngo-bo
)	is	the	modality
of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	natural	expression	(
rang-bzhin
)	is	the	modality
of	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource
,	 and	 compassionate	 energy	 or
spirituality	(
thugs-rje
)	 is	 the	 modality	 of	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Emanation
.
These	three	modalities	may	be	cultivated	through	the	techniques	known	as
Cutting	 through	 Resistance
	
(
khregs-chod
)	 and	
All-supassing	 Realisation
(
thod-rgal
	 ).	 The	 term	
natural	 expression
	 (
rang-bzhin
)	 also	 has	 another
distinctive	usage	in	the	context	of	the	present	work,	where	it	frequently	refers	to
the	attributes	represented	by	the	twenty-eight	
Īśvar
ῑ
	among	the	assembly	of	the
fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
.	See	
Natural	Expression
.
	
Eternalist
	
mu-stegs-pa
,	Skt.	
t
ῑ
rthika
In	general	Buddhist	usage,	the	term	‘eternalist’	refers	to	the	four	so-called
eternalistic	schools	of	ancient	India,	namely	
Sāṃkhya
,	Vaishnavism,	Shaivism
and	Jainism,	which	posit	the	existence	of	an	independent	self	or	soul	(
ātman
,
Tib.	
bdag
).	By	contrast,	Buddhist	schools	identify	the	self	in	terms	of	the	five
psycho-physical	
aggregates
	(
pañcaskandha
),	and	therefore	do	not	accept	the
notion	of	self	in	the	sense	of	an	eternal,	unchanging,	independently	existing
entity.	Both	eternalism	and	
nihilism
	are	regarded	as	the	two	extreme	views,
which	are	to	be	avoided	when	seeking	an	insight	into	
emptiness
,	the	true	nature
of	
reality
,	 by	 means	 of	 the	
Middle	 Way
	 (
madhyamapratipad
).	 Here	 all
apprehensions	 of	
inherent	 existence
	 constitute	 falling	 into	 the	 extreme	 of
eternalism,	and	a	total	denial	of	the	laws	of	
cause	and	effect
	in	association	with
past	and	future	lives	constitutes	falling	into	nihilism.
	
Expanse	of	[Actual]	Reality
	
chos-dbyings
,	Skt.	
dharmadhātu
The	expanse	of	actual	reality	is	a	synonym	for	the	expanse	of	
emptiness
.	As
such,	
it	indicates	both	the	dimension	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	and	the
pristine	cognition
	of	
reality’s	expanse
	(
dharmadhātujñāna
).
	
Extremes
	
mtha’
,	Skt.	
anta
From	the	perspective	of	the	
Greater	Vhicle
,	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
	is
said	to	be	free	from	the	dualistic	extremes	of	creation	and	cessation	(
skye-’gag
),

eternalism
	
and	
nihilism
	(
rtag-chad
),	existence	and	non-existence	(
yod-med
),
and	appearance	and	
emptiness
	(
snang-stong
).
	
Feast-offering
	
tshogs	[kyi	’khor-lo]
,	Skt.	
gaṇacakra
The	Tibetan	word	
tshogs
	generally	has	two	senses,	corresponding	to	the	Sanskrit
sambhāra
	and	
gaṇacakra
.	In	the	latter	case	it	refers	to	the	feast-offerings	which
are	 a	 unique	 tantric	 method	 for	 conferring	
accomplishment
	 and	 pacifying
obstacles.	 In	 general,	 feast-offerings	 are	 frequently	 held	 to	 commemorate
important	events	in	the	Buddhist	calendar,	such	as	the	tenth-day	feast-offering,
dedicated	to	
Padmasambhava
	
.	The	overall	purpose	is	to	distribute	
merit
	and
pristine	cognition
	in	the	context	of	a	specific	
tantric
	ritual.	See	also	under
Accumulation
.
	
Final	Nirvāṇa
	
yongs-su	mya-ngan-las	’das
,	Skt.	
parinirvāṇa
The	 expression	 ‘final	
nirvāṇa
’	 refers	 specifically	 to	 the	 passing	 away	 of
buddhas
,	such	as	
Śākyamuni
,	and	it	is	considered	to	be	the	last	of	the	twelve
principal	deeds,	exemplified	by	the	death	of	
Śākyamuni
	at	
Kuśinagara
.	See	also
under	
Nirvāṇa
	and	
Buddha	activities
.
	
Five	Aggregates
	
phung-po	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcaskandha
See	the	separate	entries,	under	
Aggregate	of	Consciousness
,	
Aggregate	 of
Form
,	
Aggregate	of	Feelings
,	
Aggregate	of	Perceptions
,	and	
Aggregate	of
Motivational	Tendencies
.
	
Five	Appendages
	
yan-lag	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcāṅga
The	head	and	the	four	limbs.
	
Five	Approximating	Crimes
	
nye-ba’i	mtshams-med	lnga
,	Skt
.	pañcopāntar
ῑ
ya
The	five	crimes	which	approximate	the	
five	inexpiable	crimes
	(
mtshams-med
lnga
)	in	their	severity	are:	to	rape	a	female	
arhat
	(
dgra-bcom-ma-la	’dod-log
spyod-pa
),	to	kill	one	who	abides	on	the	level	of	a	genuine	
bodhisattva
	(
byang-
sems	nges-gnas	gsod-pa
),	to	kill	a	trainee	monk	(
slob-pa’i	dge-’dun	gsod-pa
),	to
misappropriate	the	income	of	the	
monastic	community
	(
dge-’dun-gyi	’du-sgo
’phrog-pa
),	and	to	destroy	a	
stūpa
	(
mchod-rten	bshig-pa
).
	
Five	Buddha-bodies
	
sku	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcakāya

The	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
,	
Buddha-
body	 of	 Emanation
,	 Buddha-body	 of	 Awakening,	 and	 Buddha-body	 of
Indestructible	Reality.	See	
Buddha-body
	and	individual	entries.
	
Five	Degenerations
	
snyigs-ma	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcakaṣāya
The	five	degenerations	comprise:	degeneration	of	the	lifespan	(
ayuḥkaṣāya
),
degeneration	in	terms	of	views	(
dṛṣṭikaṣāya
),	degeneration	in	terms	of	
dissonant
mental	states
	(
kleśakaṣāya
),	degeneration	of	
sentient	beings
	(
sattvakaṣāya
),
and	degeneration	of	the	present	age	(
kalpakaṣāya
).
	
Five	Elements
	
’byung-ba	lnga	/	khams	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcabhūta/	pañcadhātu
According	to	the	Indo-Tibetan	system,	as	expounded	in	the	
tantras
,	and	in
medical	
and	astrological	texts,	the	five	elements	-	earth,	water,	fire,	wind,	and
space	-	are	five	basic	components	that	make	up	our	environment,	our	bodies,
and,	at	their	subtle	levels,	modalities	of	the	mind.	At	the	subtlest	level,	the
elemental	properties	exist	as	the	pure	natures	represented	by	the	five	female
buddhas
	 (
Akāśadhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
,	
Buddhalocanā
,	
Māmak
ῑ
,	
Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
	 and
Samayatārā
)	and	these	manifest	as	the	physical	properties	of	earth	(solidity),
water	(fluidity),	fire	(heat	and	light),	wind	(movement	and	energy),	and	space	-
in	other	words	as	all	the	qualities	that	constitute	the	physical	forms	that	we
experience	through	our	senses.	A	proper	understanding	of	the	elements	and	the
way	in	which	their	properties	permeate	the	nature	of	mind,	the	body	and	our
environment	is	fundamental	to	the	practice	of	Buddhist	
tantra
.	See	Chapters	8
and	11	and	Appendix	Two.
	
Five	Enlightened	Families
	
rigs	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcakula
See	
Buddha	 Family
,	
Vajra	 Family
,	
Ratna	 Family
,	
Padma	 Family
,	 and
Karma	Family
	
and	Appendix	Two.
	
Five	Hollow	Viscera
	
snod-lnga
According	to	the	traditions	of	Tibetan	medicine,	the	five	hollow	viscera	are	those
of	the	stomach,	the	large	intestine,	the	small	intestine,	the	bladder,	the	gall
bladder,	and	the	reservoir	of	reproductive	fluid	(
bsam-se’u
).
	
Five	Inexpiable	Crimes
	
mtshams-med	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcānantar
ῑ
ya
The	 five	 inexpiable	 crimes,	 which	 are	 regarded	 as	 the	 most	 severe	 and

consequently	the	most	difficult	to	overcome	by	reparation,	are:	matricide	(
ma
gsod-pa
),	arhatcide	(
dgra-bcom-pa	gsod-pa
),	patricide	(
pha	gsod-pa
),	creating	a
schism	 in	 the	
monastic	 community
	 (
dge-’dun-gyi	 dbyen-byas-ba
),	 and
intentionally	wounding	a	
buddha
	
(
de-bzhin	gshegs-pa’i	sku-la	ngan-sems-kyis
khrag	’byin-pa
).
	
Five	Poisons
	
dug-lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcakleśa
The	five	poisons	comprise	five	of	the	most	basic	
dissonant	 mental	 states
(
kleśa
)	-	all	of	which	are	grounded	in	
fundamental	ignorance
	(
avidyā
).	They
are:	
delusion
	
(
moha
),	
attachment
	(
rāga
),	
aversion
	(
dveṣa
),	pride	(
abhimāna
),
and	envy/self-cherishing	ambition	(
ῑ
rṣā
).
	
Five	Precious	Substances
	
rin-chen	lnga
Gold,	silver,	turquoise,	coral	and	pearl.
	
Five	Pristine	Cognitions
	
ye-shes	lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcājñāna
See	under	
Pristine	Cognition
.
	
Five	Sense-faculties/organs
	
dbang-po	rnam-lnga
,	Skt.	
pañcendriya
The	five	sense-faculties	or	sense-organs	comprise:	the	eyes	(
cakṣurindriya
),	ears
(
śrotrendriya
),	 nose	 (
ghrāṇendriya
),	 tongue	 (
jihvendriya
),	 and	 body
(
kāyendriya
).
	
Five	Solid	Viscera
	
don-lnga
According	to	the	traditions	of	Tibetan	medicine,	the	five	solid	viscera	are	the
heart,	lungs,	liver,	kidneys,	and	spleen.
	
Form	Realm	and	Formless	Realm
See	
Three	World-systems
.
	
Formal	Description
	
mngon-rtogs
,	Skt.	
abhisamaya
While	practising	the	
generation	stage
	(
utpattikrama
)	of	meditation,	the	
deities
are	visualised	in	accordance	with	their	formal	descriptions	which	are	set	down	in

the	
texts	of	the	appropriate	
means	for	attainment
	(
sgrub-thabs
,	Skt.	
sādhana
).
In	other	contexts	the	term	‘
abhisamaya
’	conveys	the	sense	of	‘emergent	or	clear
realisation’,	 as	 in	
Maitreya
’s	
Ornament	 of	 Emergent	 Realisation
(
Abhisamayālaṃkāra
).
	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened	Activity
	
las-bzhi
,	Skt.	
catuṣkarman
These	are	specific	ritual	functions	based	on	the	dynamic	modes	of	a	
buddha
’s
activity,	namely:	pacification	(
śāntikriyā
,	Tib.	
zhi-ba’i	las
),	which	includes	the
pacification	of	obstacles	to	spiritual	practice,	illness	and	the	causes	of	harm	to
society	and	the	environment;	enrichment	(
puṣṭikriyā
,	Tib.	
rgyas-pa’i	las
),	which
includes	increasing	the	lifespan	and	prosperity;	subjugation	(
vaṣitakriyā
,	Tib.
dbang-gi	las
),	which	includes	the	controlling	of	negative	and	hostile	forces;	and
wrath	or	transformation	(
maraṇakriyā
,	Tib.	
drag-po’i	las
),	which	includes	the
elimination	of	
malevolent	forces
.	The	ritual	enactment	of	these	four	rites	is
often	undertaken	in	the	context	of	a	
burnt	offering
	ritual	(
homa
).
	
Four	Aspects	of	Ritual	Service	and	Means	for	Attainment
	
bsnyen-sgrub	yan-
lag	bzhi
,	Skt.	
caturāṅgasevāsādhana
Whenever	 any	
means	 for	 attainment
	 (Skt.	
sādhana
)	 is	 practised,	 it	 will
comprise	the	‘four	aspects	of	ritual	service	and	means	for	attainment’.	The	four
branches	are:	ritual	service	(
sevā
),	further	ritual	service	(
upasevā
),	means	for
attainment	(
sādhana
)	and	great	means	for	attainment	(
mahāsādhana
),	which
respectively	entail	1)	
mantra
	
recitation	and	one-pointed	visualisation	of	the
meditational	deity
,	2)	prayers	that	the	
blessing
	of	the	deity	will	descend	to
transform	 mundane	 body,	 speech	 and	 mind	 into	
buddha-body
,	
speech
	 and
mind
,	3)	the	absorption	of	accomplishments	from	the	actual	deity	into	the
visualised	deity	and	thence	into	oneself,	and	4)	the	realisation	of	
primordial
purity
	experienced	when	body,	speech	and	mind	are	identical	to	those	of	the
deity.
	
Four	Aspects	of	Sensory	Contact
	
reg-bzhi
These	are	sensory	contact,	along	with	its	subject,	object	and	actual	sensation.
	
Four	Buddha-bodies
	
sku-bzhi
,	Skt.	
catuḥkāya
See	under	
Buddha-body
.
	

Four	Classes	of	Ḍākinī
	
mkha’-’gro	sde-bzhi.
The	four	classes	of	
ḍākin
ῑ
	comprise	those	born	in	sacred	abodes	or	pure	lands
(
zhing-skyes	 mkha’-’gro
),	 those	 born	 in	 consequence	 of	
mantra
	 recitation
(
sngags-skyes	 mkha’-’gro
),	 those	 who	 are	 naturally	 born	 (
lhan-skyes
mkha’-’gro
),	and	those	born	of	
pristine	cognition
	(
ye-shes	mkha’-’gro
).
	
Four	Continents	and	Eight	Subcontinents
	
gling	bzhi-dang	gling-phran	brgyad
According	 to	 traditional	 Indian	 Buddhist	 cosmology,	 the	 world	 has	
Mount
Sumeru
	
as	its	central	axis,	surrounded	by	seven	concentric	oceans	divided	from
one	 another	 by	 seven	 successive	 ranges	 of	 golden	 mountains:	
Yugandhara
,
Isadhāra
,	
Khadirika
,	
Sudarśana
,	
Aṣvakarna
,	
Vinataka
,	and	
Nimindhara
.	The
entire	world	is	girded	by	a	perimeter	of	iron	mountains	known	as	the	
Cakravāla
.
In	each	of	the	four	cardinal	directions	of	
Mount
	
Sumeru
,	there	is	located	a
continent,	along	with	two	satellites	or	subcontinents.	Among	these,	the	eastern
continent	
Viratdeha
	(
lus-’phags
;	‘sublime	in	body’)	is	semicircular	and	it	has
two	subcontinents:	
Deha
	(
lus
)	and	
Videha
	
(
lus-’phags
).	The	southern	continent
Jambudv
ῑ
pa
	(
’dzam-bu	gling
;	‘rose-apple	continent’)	is	triangular	and	its	two
subcontinents	are	
Cāmaradv
ῑ
pa
	(
rnga-yab	gling
)	and	
Aparacāmara
	(
rnga-yab
gzhan
).	The	western	continent,	
Aparagodan
ῑ
ya
	(
balang	
spyod
;	‘rich	in	cattle’),	is
circular	and	its	two	subcontinents	are	
Śāṭhā
	(
gYo-ldan
)	 and	
Uttaramantriṇa
(
lam-mchog	’gro
).	Lastly,	the	northern	continent	
Uttarakuru
	
(
sgra-mi-snyan
;
‘unpleasant	sound’)	is	square	and	its	two	subcontinents	are	
Kurava
	
(
sgra	mi-
snyan
)	and	
Kaurava	(sgra	mi-snyan-gyi	zla
).	Among	the	four,	
Jambudv
ῑ
pa
	
is
unique	in	that	it	is	here	that	the	
sacred	teachings
	of	the	
buddhas
	are	said	to
flourish.	See	Chapter	11,	Part	Three	with	respect	to	instructions	for	choosing	a
birthplace	and	Chapter	1	with	respect	to	visualising	the	
maṇḍala
	
of	offerings
.
	
Four	Delights
	
dga’-ba	bzhi
In	the	
perfection	stage
	(
sampannakrama
)	of	meditation,	when	the	practices	of
sexual	yoga	(
sbyor-ba
)	are	applied	in	order	to	bring	about	a	coalescence	of	bliss
and	
emptiness
,	the	
generative	essence
	(
thig-le
)	of	the	body	descends	through
the	
central	channel
	and	the	four	delights	are	sequentially	experienced.	As	it
descends	from	the	
energy	centre
	of	the	crown	fontanelle	to	the	throat	centre,	the
pristine	cognition
	of	delight	(
dga’-ba
)	is	experienced.	When	it	descends	from
the	throat	centre	to	the	heart	centre,	the	
pristine	cognition
	of	supreme	delight
(
mchog-dga’
)	is	experienced.	When	it	descends	from	the	heart	centre	to	the
navel	centre	the	
pristine	cognition
	of	the	absence	of	delight	(
dga’-bral
)	is

experienced.	And	when	it	descends	from	the	navel	centre	to	the	secret	centre	of
the	 genitalia,	 the	
coemergent	 delight
	 (
lhan-skyes	 dga’-ba
)	 is	 experienced.
Thereafter,	 the	
generative	 essence
	 is	 retained	 within	 the	 body	 and	 drawn
upwards	through	the	central	channel,	permeating	each	of	the	
energy	centres
	of
the	body	in	turn	with	unceasing	bliss	and	non-conceptual	
pristine	cognition
.	See
also	under	
Coemergent	Delight
.
	
Four	Elements
	
’byung-ba	bzhi
,	Skt.	
caturbhūta
Earth,	water,	fire	and	wind.	See	
Five	Elements
.
	
Four	Empwerments
	
dbang-bskur	bzhi
,	Skt.	
caturabhiṣekha
The	 four	
empowerments
	 of	 the	
Unsurpassed
	
Yoga	 tantras
,	 including
Mahāyoga
,	 are:	 the	 vase	 empowerment	 (
bum-dbang
),	 which	 purifies	 the
ordinary	body	and	its	
energy	channels
	into	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
(
nirmāṇakāya
);	the	secret	empowerment	(
gsang-dbang
),	which	purifies	ordinary
speech	 and	 its	
vital	 energy
	
into	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource
(
sambhogakāya
);	the	empowerment	of	discriminative	
pristine	cognition
	(
shes-
rab	ye-shes-kyi	dbang
)	which	purifies	ordinary	mind	and	its	
seminal	point
(
bindu
)	into	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
	(
dharmakāya
	
);	and	the	empowerment
of	word	and	meaning	(
tshig-don-gi	dbang
),	which	purifies	these	three	equally
into	 the	 Buddha-body	 of	 Essentiality	 (
svabhāvikakāya
).	 See	 also
Empowerment
.
	
Four	Extreme	Views
	
mu-bzhi
In	 the	 context	 of	 the	 present	 work,	 these	 are	 the	 four	 extreme	 views	 of
permanence,	decay,	self,	and	
substantialism
.
	
Four	Formless	Meditative	Absorptions
	
gzugs-med	snyoms-’jug	bzhi
,	Skt.
catuḥsamāpatti
	
The	four	formless	meditative	absorptions	which	lead	to	birth	in
the	world-system	of	formlessness,	at	the	summit	of	
cyclic	existence
,	are	those
known	 as:	 infinite	 as	 the	 sky	 (
ākāśānantyāyatana
),	 infinite	 consciousness
(
vijñānānantyāyatana
),	nothing-at-all	(
akiṃcanyāyatana
),	and	neither	perception
nor	non-perception	(
naivasaṃjñānasaṃjñāyatana
	
).	See	
Three	World-systems
.
	
Four	Immeasurable	Aspirations
	
tshad-med	bzhi
,	Skt.	
catvāryapramāṇāni
Immeasurable	
compassion
,	 love,	 empathetic	 joy	 and	
equanimity
.	 The

cultivation	of	the	four	immeasurable	wishes,	which	is	normally	accompanied	by
the	recitation	of	a	short	prayer	(see	Chapter	1),	is	a	common	preliminary	to	daily
practice.	This	contemplation	establishes	correct	motivation	and	provides	a	strong
impetus	to	the	cultivation	of	the	
altruistic	intention	to	attain	enlightenment
for	the	sake	of	all	sentient	beings.
	
Four	Malevolent	Forces
	
bdud-bzhi
,	Skt.	
caturmāra
See	
Malevolent/Beguiling	Forces
.
	
Four	Modes	of	Liberation
	
grol-lugs	bzhi
The	 four	 modes	 of	 liberation,	 according	 to	 Atiyoga,	 comprise:	 primordial
liberation	(
ye-grol
	),	
natural	liberation
	(
rang-grol
	),	direct	liberation	(
cer-grol
	),
and	 further	 liberation	 (
yang-grol
)	 or	 liberation	 from	 extremes	 (
mtha’-grol
).
These	are	attained	in	connection	with	the	
intermediate	state	of	meditative
concentration
	(
bsam-gtan	bar-do
).
	
Four	Noble	Truths
	
bden-pa	bzhi
,	Skt.	
caturāryasatya
The	teaching	on	the	four	noble	truths	forms	the	basis	of	the	first	promulgation	of
Buddhism,	since	it	is	the	very	first	formal	discourse	given	by	
Śākyamuni
	in
Sarnath
	
following	his	attainment	of	
buddhahood
	at	
Bodh	Gaya
.	The	four	truths
are:	the	truth	of	
suffering
,	the	truth	of	its	origins,	the	truth	of	its	cessation,	and
the	truth	of	the	path	leading	to	such	cessation.	The	doctrine	of	four	truths	lays
the	foundation	upon	which	the	entire	structure	of	the	path	to	
buddhahood
	is
built	and	the	understanding	of	these	four	truths	is	therefore	an	indispensable
basis	 for	 a	 successful	 practice	 of	 the	 Buddhist	 path.	 The	 first	 two	 truths
constitute	one	inter-relationship	of	
cause	and	effect
	and	the	remaining	two,
another.	 Without	 proper	 insight	 into	 the	 first	 inter-relationship	 no	 genuine
aspiration	to	seek	freedom	from	
cyclic	existence
	
will	arise.	Similarly,	without
insight	into	the	second,	no	genuine	release	from	the	bondage	of	
karmically
conditioned	existence	can	be	achieved.
	
Four	Preliminaries
See	
Preliminary	Practices
.

	
Four	Times
	
dus-bzhi
Past,	present,	future,	and	indefinite	time.	In	some	contexts	the	four	times	refer	to
different	phases	of	conceptual	thought,	in	which	case	they	are	enumerated	as
past	thoughts,	present	thoughts,	future	thoughts	and	indeterminate	thoughts	(
so-
sor	rtog-pa
).
	
Fundamental	Ignorance
	
ma-rig-pa
,	Skt.	
avidyā
The	most	fundamental	misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	
actual	reality
,	which	is
the	source	of	all	
dissonant	mental	states
	and	the	
twelve	links	of	dependent
origination
.	Divergent	views	exist	among	Buddhist	thinkers	about	the	specific
character	and	nature	of	fundamental	ignorance.	For	example,	the	fourth-century
master	
Asaṅga
	
conceives	this	ignorance	to	be	a	state	of	unknowing,	ignorant	of
the	 actual	 nature	 of	
reality
.	 In	 contrast,	 for	 masters	 like	
Nāgārjuna
	 and
especially	
Dharmak
ῑ
rti
,	it	is	an	active	state	of	mis-knowing,	
i.e.
	it	understands
the	existence	of	one’s	own	self	and	the	world	in	a	fundamentally	distorted
manner.	 In	 the	 classical	 Indian	 Buddhist	 texts,	 two	 principal	 forms	 of
fundamental	ignorance	are	identified	-	(i)	ignorance	pertaining	to	the	actual
nature	of	
reality
	and	(ii)	ignorance	pertaining	to	the	law	of	
cause	and	effect
.
The	
Nyingma
	master	
Dudjom	Rinpoche
	explains	the	evolution	of	
bewilderment
from	fundamental	ignorance	in	three	phases:	first,	the	fundamental	ignorance	of
self-identity
	(
bdag-nyid	 gcig-pu’i	 ma-rig-pa
)	 is	 not	 recognised	 to	 be	 false;
second,	 the	
coemergent	 ignorance
	 (
lhan-skyes	 ma-rig-pa
)	 ensures	 that	 the
consciousness	of	
self-identity
	and	non-recognition	of	
actual	reality
	coincide;
and,	third,	the	fundamental	ignorance	of	the	imaginary	(
kun-btags	ma-rig-pa
)
generates	
bewilderment
,	through	which	one’s	own	bewildering	perceptions	are
externally	discerned	in	terms	of	the	subject-object	dichotomy,	giving	rise	to	all
the	
sufferings
	
of	
cyclic	existence
.
	
Garuda
	
khyung
A	mythical	bird	normally	depicted	with	an	owl-like	sharp	beak,	often	holding	a
snake,	and	with	large	and	powerful	wings.	References	to	this	bird	can	be	also
found	in	Hindu	literature	where	it	is	often	mentioned	as	the	flying	mount	of
powerful	mundane	
gods
	(
deva
).	In	Buddhism,	the	symbolism	of	the	
garuḍa
	is
generally	associated	with	
pristine	cognition
	(it	is	said	that	the	
garuḍa
	can	fly	as
soon	as	it	is	hatched)	and	with	the	consuming	of	
dissonant	mental	states
	(the
holding	of	a	snake	in	its	beak).	In	a	Buddhist	context,	the	
garuḍa
	is	also

associated	 with	
Vajrapāṇi
	
and	 certain	 wrathful	 forms	 of	
Padmasambhava
through	its	power	to	subdue	snakes,	
serpentine	water	spirits
,	and	subterranean
creatures,	 and,	 according	 to	 the	
Nyingma
	
school,	 the	
garuḍa
	 is	 sometimes
revered	 as	 a	 guardian	 of	
treasures
	(
gter-bdag
)	 or	 even	 as	 a	 repository	 of
treasures
	(
gter-kha
).
	
Gelug
	
dge-lugs
One	of	the	four	main	traditions	or	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.	Founded	by	the
great	fourteenth-century	philosopher	
Tsongkhapa
	and	his	foremost	students,	it
quickly	established	itself	as	a	dominant	tradition	of	Tibetan	Buddhism	with	its
monasteries	extending	from	the	far	west	of	Tibet	to	
Chamdo
,	
Dartsedo
,	and
Amdo
	
in	 the	 east.	 Following	 the	 Third	
Dalai	Lama
’s	 visit	 to	 Mongolia,	 it
became	the	state	religion	in	Mongolia	and	the	Buriat	regions	of	the	Soviet
Union,	and	during	the	seventeenth	century	its	hierarchy	became	the	dominant
political	 force	 in	 Central	 Tibet	 when	 the	 Fifth	
Dalai	 Lama
	 assumed	 both
spiritual	and	temporal	power	with	the	assistance	of	Mongol	armies.	‘Gelug’
literally	 means	 the	 tradition	 of	 the	 virtuous	 path	 and	 is	 named	 after	 the
monastery	called	
Geden
	or	
Ganden
,	founded	by	
Tsongkhapa
	in	1409.
	
generation	Stage
	
bskyed-rim
,	Skt.	
utpattikrama
According	to	the	traditions	of	the	
tantras
,	the	main	practices	of	
meditation
which	 follow	 the	 successful	 conclusion	 of	 the	
preliminary	 practices
(
sngon-’gro
)	 include	 the	 generation	 stage	 and	 the	
perfection	 stage
	 (Skt.
sampannakrama
).	Both	the	generation	and	
perfection	stages
	of	meditation	are
related	to	transforming	our	mundane	experiences	of	each	of	the	phases	of	life
and	death,	namely:	the	
intermediate	states	of	the	time	of	death,	of	reality,	of
rebirth
,	and	
of	living
.	The	generation	stage	is	characterised	by	the	meditative
processes	of	the	practitioner’s	gradual	identification	with	the	form	and	
pristine
cognition
	of	the	
meditational	deity
	and	it	is	during	this	stage	that,	with	the
support	of	
mantra
	recitation,	the	elaborate	visualisation	of	the	deity	is	gradually
generated	 and	 stabilised.	 This	 process,	 known	 as	 self-generation,	 is	 a
simulacrum	of	bringing	the	three	
buddha-bodies
	on	to	the	path	and	is	composed
therefore	of	three	principal	aspects:	dissolution	into	
emptiness
	
(
Buddha-body
of	 Reality
),	 arising	 into	 a	 subtle	 form	 such	 as	 a	
seed-syllabe
	 or	
symbol
(
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
),	and	full	emergence	into	the	deity’s	form
(
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
).	See	the	Introductory	Commentary	by	HH	the
Dalai	Lama	and	
Perfection	Stage
.

	
Generative	Essences
	
byang-sems/thig-le
,	Skt.	
bodhicitta/bindu
In	the	
tantras
	and	in	Tibetan	medicine,	the	generative	essences	or	fluids	are
considered	as	arising	from	a	supreme	
seminal	point
	(
thig-le	chen-po
)	located	in
the	middle	of	the	heart	centre.	From	the	perspective	of	the	
tantras
	this	supreme
seminal	point
	is	regarded	as	the	seed	of	
buddhahood
	and	from	the	perspective
of	Tibetan	medicine	it	is	regarded	as	the	basis	of	both	physical	and	mental
health.	This	supreme	
seminal	point
	at	the	heart	is	considered	to	be	the	size	of	a
small	pea	or	large	mustard	seed	and	it	incorporates	the	pure	essences	(
dvangs-
ma
)	of	the	five	elements,	the	presence	of	which	is	indicated	by	its	five-coloured
glow.	From	the	perspective	of	the	
tantras
	the	very	subtle	
vital	energy
,	known	as
the	life-bearing	wind	or	breath,	dwells	inside	this	
seminal	point
	and	at	the
culmination	of	the	
intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death
	all	vital	energies
ultimately	dissolve	into	it	and	the	
inner	radiance
	of	the	ground	dawns.	During
life,	a	single	
seminal	point
	abides	in	each	of	the	five	
energy	centres
	and	each
seminal	point	is	whiter	at	the	top	and	redder	at	the	bottom.	At	the	crown	centre
the	whiter	element	predominates	and	at	the	level	of	the	genitalia	the	redder
element	predominates.	According	to	Tibetan	medicine,	white	generative	fluids
are	said	to	produce	bone	tissue	in	the	embryo,	and	it	is	from	the	bone	marrow
that	both	semen	and	breast	milk	are	said	to	be	produced.	Red	generative	fluids
are	said	to	produce	blood,	flesh	and	skin.	At	their	least	subtle	level,	therefore,	the
former	are	identified	with	semen	and	the	latter	with	menstrual	blood.	See	also
under	
Seminal	Point
.
	
Gods
	
lha
,	Skt.	
deva
One	of	the	
six	classes	of	living	beings
	(
’gro-ba	rigs-drug
).	The	mode	of	being
and	activity	of	the	gods	is	said	to	be	engendered	and	dominated	by	exaltation,
indulgence	and	pride.	The	gods	exist	in	realms	higher	than	that	of	the	human
realm	in	the	world-system	of	desire	(
kāmadhātu
),	and	also	in	the	world-systems
of	 form	 (
rūpadhātu
	
)	 and	 formlessness	 (
ārūpyadhātu
).	 See	
Three	 World-
systems
.
	
Gods	of	the	Ten	Directions
	
phyogs-bcu’i	lha
,	Skt.	
daśadikpāla
The	gods	who	traditionally	are	said	to	preside	over	the	
ten	directions
	of	space
are	otherwise	known	as	the	protector	deities	of	the	ten	directions,	viz.:	
Indra
,
Yama
,	
Varuṇa
,	
Yakṣa
,	
Agni
,	
Rākṣasa
,	
Vāyu
,	
Bhūta
,	
Brahmā
,	and	
Vanadev
ῑ
	or
Sthāvarā
.

	
Great	Bliss
	
bde-chen
,	Skt.	
mahāsukha
In	the	context	of	
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantra
,	‘great	bliss’	refers	to	the	blissful
states	experienced	when	the	meditator	enters	into	union	with	a	partner	(either	in
visualisation	at	the	beginner’s	level	or	in	actuality	at	an	advanced	stage).	In	both
cases,	the	experiences,	to	be	valid,	have	to	arise	as	a	result	of	the	dissolution	of
mental	 conceptuality	 and	 the	 vital	 energies	 which	 support	 these	 conceptual
states.	Such	a	blissful	state	of	
mind
,	when	generated	within	a	direct	experience
of	
emptiness
,	free	from	attachment,	becomes	what	is	known	as	the	union	of
bliss	and	
emptiness
.
	
Great	Perfection
	
rdzogs-pa	chen-po
,	Skt.	
mahāsandhi
Great	Perfection	is	a	synonym	for	
Atiyoga
,	the	highest	of	the	
nine	vehicles
according	to	the	
Nyingma
	tradition.	
Atiyoga
	is	known	as	the	Great	Perfection
because	 both	 the	
generation
	 and	
perfection	 stages
	 of	
meditation
	 are
effortlessly	present.	‘Perfection’	
(
rdzogs
)	implies	that	the	enlightened	attributes
of	the	
Three	Buddha-bodies
	are	effortlessly	perfected	in	the	stabilisation	of	the
meditator’s	
instrinsic	awareness
	(
rang-rig
	
).	Here	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
(
dharmakāya
)	 is	 the	
essence
	 or	
emptiness
	
(
ngo-bo	 stong-pa
)	 of	
intrinsic
awareness
;	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource
	
(
sambhogakāya
)	 is	 its
natural	expression
	and	radiance	(
rang-bzhin	gsal-ba
);	and	the	
Buddha-body	of
Emanation
	(
nirmāṇakāya
)	is	its	all-pervasive	unimpeded	compassionate	energy
(
ma-’gags	thugs-rje
)	expressed	in	physical	form.	‘Great’	(
chen
)	implies	that	this
perfection	is	the	underlying	nature	of	all	things.	The	
tantra
	texts	and	instructions
of	
Atiyoga
,	contained	in	the	
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
,	are	divided
into	three	classes:	the	Mental	Class	(
sems-sde
),	which	emphasises	the	radiance
(
gsal-ba’i	cha
)	of	the	nature	of	mind	(
sems-nyid
);	the	Spatial	Class	(
klongsde
	
)
which	 emphasises	 the	
emptiness
	 (
stong-pa’i	 cha
)	 of	
reality’s	 expanse
(
dharmadhātu
	
);	and	the	
Esoteric	Instructional	Class
	(
man-ngag-gi	sde
),	in
which	these	aspects	are	given	equal	emphasis	and	in	which	the	meditative
techniques	of	
Cutting	through	Resistance
	(
khregs-chod
)	and	
All-surpassing
Realisation
	(
thod-rgal
)	lead	respectively	to	the	realisation	of	the	
Buddha-body
of	Reality
	and	the	
Buddha-body	of	Form
.
	
Great	Seal
	
phyag-rgya	chen-po
,	Skt.	
mahāmudrā
According	to	the	tradition	of	the	
sūtras
,	the	expression	‘Great	Seal’	refers	to	the
comprehension	of	
emptiness
	as	the	all-encompassing	ultimate	nature	of	
reality
.

Emptiness
	is	called	the	great	seal,	for	nothing	extraneous	to	it	exists,	and	all
phenomena,	both	physical	and	mental,	are	in	their	ultimate	natures	empty	of
inherent	existence
.	According	to	the	tradition	of	the	
tantras
	in	general,	the
practice	of	the	Great	Seal	is	considered	in	terms	of	ground,	path	and	result.	As	a
‘path’,	 it	 comprises	 a	 sequence	 of	 systematic	 advanced	
meditations
	 on
emptiness
	and	pure	appearance,	integrating	the	techniques	of	
calm	abiding
	and
penetrative	insight
,	which	focuses	on	the	nature	of	the	meditator’s	own	
mind
.
This	type	of	
meditation
	
is	popular	in	both	the	
Kagyu
	and	
Gelug
	schools	of
Tibetan	Buddhism.	As	a	‘result’,	the	expression	‘Great	Seal’	refers	to	the	state	of
buddhahood
,	 the	 conclusive	 result	 or	 supreme	 spiritual	
accomplishment
.
According	to	the	
Nyingma
	school,	within	the	context	of	
Mahāyoga
	in	particular,
the	term	refers	to	the	great	seal	of	
buddha-body
	
which	secures	the	
ground-of-
all	 consciousness
	 (
ālayavijñāna
)	 as	 the	 mirror-like	
pristinne	 cognition
.	 A
distinction	is	also	drawn	between	the	supreme	accomplishment	of	the	Great	Seal
(
phyag-rgya	chen-po	mchog-gi	dngos-grub
),	which	is	to	be	attained	in	the	course
of	the	meditator’s	lifetime,	and	the	coalescent	Buddha-body	of	the	Great	Seal
(
zung-’jug	 phyag-rgya	 chen-po’i	 sku
),	 which	 is	 identified	 with	 the	
inner
radiance
	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
.
	
Greater	Vehicle
	
theg-pa	chen-po
,	Skt.	
mahāyāna
When	the	Buddhist	teachings	are	classified	according	to	their	power	to	lead
beings	to	an	enlightened	state,	a	distinction	is	made	between	the	teachings	of	the
Lesser	 Vehicle
	 (
h
ῑ
nayāna
)	 and	 those	 of	 the	 Greater	 Vehicle.	 In	 terms	 of
motivation,	the	practitioner	of	the	Lesser	Vehicle	emphasises	the	individual’s
own	freedom	from	
cyclic	existence
	as	the	primary	motivation	and	goal	and	the
practitioner	of	the	Greater	Vehicle	emphasises	altruism	and	has	the	
liberation
	of
all	
sentient	beings
	as	the	principal	objective.	As	the	term	‘Greater	Vehicle’
implies,	the	path	followed	by	
bodhisattvas
	is	analogous	to	a	large	carriage	which
can	transport	a	vast	number	of	people	to	
liberation
,	as	compared	to	a	smaller
vehicle	for	the	individual	practitioner.	In	terms	of	philosophy,	the	principal
philosophical	schools	of	the	Lesser	Vehicle	are	
Vaibhāṣika
	and	
Sautrāntika
	and
those	of	the	Greater	Vehicle	are	
Cittamātra
	and	
Madhyamaka
.	In	terms	of	the
path,	the	Lesser	Vehicle	emphasises	complete	renunciation	of	
dissonant	mental
states
	 and	 the	 practice	 of	 the	
four	 nble	 truths
	 and	 the	
twelve	 links	 of
dependent	origination
,	while	the	Greater	Vehicle	allows	the	taking	on	to	the
path	 of	
dissonant	 mental	 states
	 and	 emphasises	 the	 practice	 of	 the	
six
perfections
.	 According	 to	 the	 Greater	 Vehicle,	 the	 entire	 path	 towards	 the

attainment	of	
buddhahood
	is	presented	within	the	framework	of	two	main
systems	or	
vehicles
	
(
yāna
),	those	of	the	
sūtras
	(
sūtrayāna
)	and	the	
tantras
(
tantrayāna
).	 The	 former,	 also	 known	 as	 the	
vehicle
	 of	
bodhisattvas
(
bodhisattvayāna
),	 entails	 a	 progression	 from	
fundamental	 ignorance
	 to
enlightenement
	 which	 may	 take	 place	 over	 an	 immeasurable	 number	 of
lifetimes.	 The	 latter,	 also	 known	 as	 the	
Vehicle	 of	 Indestructible	 Reality
(
Vajrayāna
)	or	the	
vehicle
	of	
secret
	
mantras
	(
guhyamantrayāna
),	includes	the
preliminary	practices
	and	the	
generation
	and	
perfection	stages
	of	meditation
through	which	it	is	said	that	enlightenment	can	be	achieved	in	a	single	lifetime.
	
Ground
	
gzhi
See	under	
Continuum	of	the	Ground
.
	
Ground-of-all
kun-gzhi
,	Skt
.	ālaya
According	to	the	
Great	Perfection
,	the	ground-of-all	is	identified	with	the
continuum	of	the	ground
.	This	ground-of-all	is	therefore	contrasted	with	the
ground-of-all	 consciousness
	 (Skt.	
ālayavijñāna
).	 See	
Aggregate	 of
Consciousness.
	
Ground-of-all	Consciousness
	
kun-gzhi’i	rnam-par	shes-pa
,	Skt.	
ālayavijñāna
See	under	
Aggregate	of	Conscoousness
.
	
Guhyagarbhatantra
	
rGyud	gsang-ba’i	snying-po
The	most	all-embracing	of	the	eighteen	
Mahāyoga	tantras
,	focusing	specifically
on	the	
maṇḍala
	of	the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
	and	the	fifty-eight	
wrathful
deities
.	There	are	three	distinct	versions	of	the	
Guhyagarbhatantra
,	respectively
in	82,	46	and	22	chapters,	and	it	is	the	last	of	these	that	is	most	widely	studied.
All	of	these	versions	are	included	within	the	general	cycle	of	the	
Tantra	of	the
Magical	Net	(Māyājālatantra
).	See	under	
Magical	Net
	and	Gyurme	Dorje’s
‘Brief	Literary	History’.
	
Habitual	Tendencies
	
bag-chags
,	Skt.	
vāsanā
The	deep-seated	propensities	and	habitual	tendencies	inherited	from	our	
past
actions
.	 This	 concept	 of	 habitual	 tendencies	 is	 critical	 to	 the	 Buddhist
understanding	 of	 the	 causal	 dynamics	 of	 karmic	 actions	 as	 well	 as	 its
understanding	 of	 the	 process	 of	 conditioning.	 For	 example,	 when	 a	 person

commits	an	act,	such	as	the	negative	act	of	killing,	the	act	itself	does	not	last.	So
that	which	connects	the	committing	of	this	act	and	the	experiencing	of	its
consequence	in	the	future,	in	some	instances	in	a	future	life,	is	the	habitual
tendencies	imprinted	upon	one’s	psyche	by	the	act	committed.	Similarly,	when	a
strong	emotion	such	as	a	powerful	feeling	of	hatred	arises,	although	the	actual
emotion	may	subside	after	a	while,	the	experience	leaves	a	mark	or	an	imprint,
which	will	continue	to	have	an	impact	on	the	person’s	attitudes	and	emotions	as
well	as	behaviour.	It	is	the	collection	of	such	countless	habitual	tendencies
imprinted	 in	 our	 psyche	 by	
dissonant	 mental	 states
	 that	 constitutes	 the
obscuration	of	misconceptions	concerning	the	known	range	of	phenomena	
(Skt.
jñeyāvaraṇa
),	the	total	eradication	of	which	occurs	only	when	one	achieves	full
awakening	or	
buddhahood
.	See	
Obscuration
.
	
Hand-gestures
	
phyag-rgya
,	Skt.	
mudrā
See	
Seal
.
	
Hatred
	
zhe-sdang
,	Skt.	
dveṣa
See	
Aversion
.
	
Hayagriva
	
rta-mgrin
The	name	of	a	wrathful	deity,	usually	red	in	colour,	with	a	green	horse’s	head
and	 neck	 (
rta-mgrin
)	 protruding	 from	 amongst	 the	 hair	 on	 his	 head.	 The
teachings	and	the	texts	associated	with	
Hayagr
ῑ
va
	belong	within	the	
sādhana
class	of	
Mahāyoga
,	where	they	are	known	as	the	
tantras
	of	buddha-speech.	In
this	 respect,	
Hayagr
ῑ
va
	
is	 considered	 to	 be	 the	 wrathful	 counterpart	 of
Avalokiteśvara
.	More	generally,	as	in	our	text,	he	is	depicted	as	a	gatekeeper	of
certain	
maṇḍalas
	and	sacred	shrines.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Heart-mantra
	
snying-po
,	Skt.	
hṛdaya
See	
Mantra
.
	
Heart-mantra	 of	 Dependent	 Origination
	
rten-’brel	 snying-po
,	 Skt
.
prat
ῑ
tyasamutpādahṛdaya
The	heart-mantra	of	
dependent	origination
,	YE	DHARMĀ	HETUPRABHAVĀ
HETUN	TESĀM	TATHĀGATO	HY	AVADAT	TESĀM	CA	YO	NIRODHO
EVAṂ	VĀDĪ	MAHĀŚRAMANAH,	can	be	translated	as	‘Whatever	events	arise

from	a	cause,	the	Tathāgata	has	told	the	cause	thereof,	and	the	great	virtuous
ascetic	also	has	taught	their	cessation	as	well.’	See	
Mantra
	and	
Dependent
Origination
.
	
Hell	[Realms]
	
na-rag	dmyal-ba’i	gnas/dmyal-ba
,	Skt.	
naraka
See	
Eihteen	Hells
.
	
Hermit	Buddha
	
rang-rgyal
,	Skt.	
pratyekabuddha
The	 practitioners	 of	 the	
Lesser	 Vehicle
	 (
h
ῑ
nayāna
)	 include	 both	
pious
attendants
	
(
śrāvaka
)	and	hermit	buddhas.	Among	these,	the	hermit	buddhas	are
those	who	pursue	the	path	to	
liberation
	without	relying	on	a	teacher,	following	a
natural	 predisposition.	 According	 to	
Maitreya
’s	
Ornament	 of	 Emergent
Realisation
,	the	accomplishment	of	the	hermit	buddhas	is	considered	to	surpass
that	of	the	
pious	attendants
	in	the	sense	that	they	realise	the	
emptiness
	of
external	phenomena,	composed	of	atomic	particles,	in	addition	to	realising	the
emptiness
	of	the	individual	personality	(
pudgala
).	However,	unlike	
bodhisattvas
they	are	said	not	to	realise	that	the	internal	phenomena	of	
conciousness
	too	are
without	
inherent	existence
.	The	
realisation
	of	a	hermit	buddha	relies	not	only
on	the	
renunciation
	or	monastic	discipline,	which	is	also	undertaken	by	
pious
attendants
,	 but	 on	 their	 comprehension	 of	 the	
twelve	 links	 of	 dependent
origination
	and	ability	to	reverse	these	through	the	power	of	
meditation
.
	
Hero
	
dpa’-bo
,	Skt.	
v
ῑ
ra
See	
Spiritual	Hero
.
	
Heruka
	
khrag-’thung/he-ru-ka
In	general,	the	term	
heruka
	is	an	epithet	for	all	
wrathful
	male	
meditational
deities
,	 although	 in	 specific	 contexts	 it	 may	 refer	 exclusively	 to	 the
meditational	 deity
	
Ṡr
ῑ
heruka
	 and	 related	 meditational	 deities	 such	 as
Cakrasamvara
.	In	the	context	of	the	present	work,	the	term	refers	only	to	the	six
wrathful	male	
buddhas
:	
Mahottara	Heruka
,	
Buddha	Heruka
,	
Vajra	Heruka
,
Ratna	Heruka
,	
Padma	Heruka
,	and	
Karma	Heruka
.	Literally,	the	term	can	be
interpreted	as	‘blood-drinker’,	‘
blood-drinking	hero
’,	‘delighting	in	blood’,	or
‘holding	a	
blood-filled	skull
’.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Higher	Existences
	
gnas	mtho-ris
,	Skt.	
svarga

The	three	higher	realms	of	the	
gods
,	
antigods
,	and	humans.
	
Highest	Yoga	Tantra
	
bla-med	rgyud
,	Skt.	
yoganiruttaratantra
See	
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantra
.
	
Hundred	Sacred	Enlightened	Families
	
dam-pa	rigs-brgya
Those	of	the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
	and	the	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
.	See
Appendix	Two.
	
Hundred-syllabe	Mantra
	
yig-brgya
The	hundred-syllable	
mantra
	of	
Vajrasattva
	may	be	interpreted	as	follows:	‘OM
Vajrasattva!	Protect	my	commitments!	Vajrasattva!	Let	them	be	firm!	Let	me	be
steadfast!	Let	me	be	satisfied!	Let	me	be	nourished!	Let	me	be	loved!	Bestow	all
accomplishments	upon	me!	With	regard	to	all	my	past	actions,	make	my	mind
virtuous!	HŪṂ	(seed-syllable	of	buddha-mind)!	HA	(four	immeasurables)!	HA
(four	 empowerments)!	 HA	 (four	 delights)!	 HA	 (four	 buddha-bodies)!	 HOH
(joyous	 laughter)	 !	 Transcendent	 One!	 Indestructible	 Reality	 of	 all	 the
Tathāgatas!	Do	not	forsake	me!	Make	me	into	indestructible	reality!	Great	Being
of	 Commitment!	 ĀḤ	 (non-dual	 union).’	 The	 recitation	 of	 this	
mantra
,	 in
conjunction	 with	 the	 visualisation	 of	
Vajrasattva
	 and	 the	 confession	 of
negativity,	is	an	essential	component	of	the	
preliminary	practices
	(
sngon-’gro
).
See	Chapter	1	and	
Vajrsattva
.
	
Ignorance
	
ma-rig-pa,
	Skt.	
avidyā
See	under	
Fundamental	Ignorance
.
	
Illusion-like	Body
	
sgyu-ma’i	lta-bu	lus
See	under	
Illusory	Body
.
	
Illusory	Body
	
sgyu-lus
A	 specific	
Vajrayāna
	 concept,	 the	 term	 ‘illusory	 body’	 refers	 to	 a	 unique
embodiment	in	which	an	advanced	
yogin
	arises	at	a	high	level	of	the	
perfection
stage
	according	to	the	
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantras
.	The	arising	of	the	
yogin
	in	the
form	of	the	illusory	body	occurs	when	an	indivisible	unity	of	buddha-body,
speech	and	mind	has	been	actualised	at	the	conclusion	of	the	
generation
	and
perfection	stages
	of	meditation.	The	attainment	of	the	illusory	body	is	divided

into	two	stages;	the	attainment	of	the	impure	illusory	body	(
ma	dag-pa’i	sgyu-
lus
)	and	then	attainment	of	the	pure	illusory	body	(
dag-pa’i	sgyu-lus
).	The	first
stage	is	called	impure	because	the	
yogin
	is	still	not	totally	free	from	all	
habitual
tendencies
	that	obstruct	subtle	knowledge.	When	the	
yogin
	attains	the	pure
illusory	body,	which	is	in	union	with	inner	radiance,	this	marks	the	attainment	of
the	highest	union	that	is	the	full	awakening	of	
buddhahood
,	the	attainment	of
the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
.	According	to	the	
perfection	stage
	of
meditation,	there	are	distinctive	meditations	which	focus	on	the	impure	illusory
body	and	the	pure	illusory	body.	In	the	former	case,	the	meditation	focuses	on	all
physical	 phenomena	 as	 being	 dream-like	 and	 illusory	 in	 manner,	 without
inherent	existence
.	In	the	latter	case,	the	meditation	focuses	on	the	
maṇḍala
	of
deities	visualised	according	to	the	so-called	twelve	similes	of	illusion	(
sgyu-ma’i
dpe	bcu-gnyis
).
	
Impermanence
	
mi-rtag-pa
,	Skt
.	anitya
Impermanence,	 along	 with	
suffering
	 and	 the	 absence	 of	
self-identity
,	 is
regarded	in	Buddhism	as	one	of	the	three	marks	or	characteristics	of	causally
conditioned	phenomena.	Although	Buddhist	literature	mentions	various	degrees
of	 impermanence,	 in	 general	 it	 can	 be	 defined	 as	 the	 moment	 by	 moment
changing	nature	of	all	things.	Nothing	endures	through	time	without	change,	and
the	process	of	change	is	dynamic	and	never	ending,	reflecting	the	nature	of	flux
and	fluidity	in	conditioned	existence.	This	fundamental	quality	of	impermanence
extends	to	both	the	external	world	and	the	perceiving	
mind
.
	
Imperecatory	Female	Spirits
	
ma-mo
,	Skt.	
mātaraḥ
	
The	imprecatory	female
spirits	are	generally	depicted	as	ugly,	ferocious,	dark-complexioned,	and	half-
naked	 with	 emaciated	 breasts	 and	 matted	 hair.	 They	 invoke	 curses	 and
imprecations,	 inflicting	 plague	 (
dal-yams
)	 on	 living	 beings.	 The	 mundane
imprecatory	female	spirits	of	Tibet	were	subdued	by	
Padmasambhava
	on	Mount
Chuwori
,	while	the	supramundane	category	includes	the	protectress	
Sr
ῑ
dev
ῑ
	(Tib.
dpal-ldan	lha-mo
)	in	the	form	Remat
ῑ
,	and	the	eight	
mātarah
	(
ma-mo	brgyad
)
headed	by	
Gaur
ῑ
,	who	form	one	subcategory	of	the	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
.
See	Appendix	Two.	One	of	the	eight	principal	
meditational	deities
	 of	 the
Mahāyoga
	
sādhana
	 class	 is	 known	 as	 Imprecatory	
Mātaraḥ
	(
ma-mo	 rbod-
gtong
).
	
Incalculable	Aeon
	
grangs-med	bskal-pa
,	Skt.	
asaṃkhyeyakalpa

The	expression	incalculable	aeon	indicates	a	period	of	time	equivalent	to	10	to
the	power	of	59	lesser	
aeons
.
	
Indestructible	Chains	of	Inner	Radiance
	
’od-gsal	rdo-rje	lu-gu-rgyud
The	 appearance	 of	 indestructible	 chains	 of	 light	 or	
inner	 radiance
	 occurs
through	the	meditative	technique	known	as	
All-surpassing	Realisation
	(
thod-
rgal
	),	according	to	the	
Great	Perfection
	(
rdzogs-pa	chen-po
).	The	arising	of
these	chains	of	light	is	an	indication	of	the	
natural	expression
	(
rang-bzhin
)	of
intrinsic	awareness
	(
rang-rig
),	through	which	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource
	becomes	manifest.
	
Indestructible	Cross-legged	Posture
	
rdo-rje’i	skyil-krung
,	Skt.	
vajrāsana
Contrasted	 with	 the	 ‘lotus	 posture’	 (Skt.	
padmāsana
),	 this	 ‘indestructible
posture’	is	formed	by	crossing	the	legs	with	the	feet	upturned	and	folded	along
the	thighs.	In	the	case	of	the	indestructible	posture	the	right	leg	is	folded	above
the	left,	whereas	in	the	lotus	position	the	left	leg	is	folded	over	the	right.	This	is
one	of	the	optimum	recommended	meditation	postures,	included	in	the	
Seven-
point	Posture	of
	
Vairocana
	
.
	
Indestructible	Expanse
	
rdo-rje’i	dbyings
,	Skt.	
vajradhātu
Generally	 a	 synonym	 for	 the	
expanse	 of	 reality
	 (Skt.	
dharmadhātu
)	 or
emptiness
.	In	certain	contexts	it	also	refers	to	the	name	of	the	central	figures	of
the	
Vajradhātu	
maṇḍala
	of	the	
Yogatantras
.
	
Indestructible	Hell
	
rdo-rje	dmyal-ba
,	Skt.	
vajranaraka
A	synonym	for	the	hell	of	ultimate	torment	(Skt.	
Av
ῑ
ci
),	which	relates	to	the
admonition	that	those	who	violate	their	
commitments
	in	respect	of	the	
Vehicle
of	Indestructible	Reaity
	are	reborn	there.	See	
Eighteen	Hells
.
	
Indestructible	Reality
	
rdo-rje,
	Skt.	
vajra
The	 fully	 enlightened	
buddha-body
,	
speech
	 and	
mind
	 are	 described	 as
indestructible	reality.	This	suggests	that	the	fruitional	attributes	of	
buddhahood
are	 adamantine	 and	 indivisible,	 for	 they	 are	 invulnerable	 to	 all	 degrees	 of
physical,	verbal	and	mental	defilement.
	
Individual	Disciplines
	
so-sor	thar-pa
,	Skt.	
prātimokṣa

See	under	
Pratimokṣa
.
Inherent	Existence
	
rang-ngo-bo-nyid
,	Skt.	
svabhāvatā
The	term	‘inherent	existence’	refers	to	the	ontological	status	of	phenomena,
according	to	which	phenomena	are	attributed	with	existence	in	their	own	right,
inherently,	in	and	of	themselves,	objectively,	and	independent	of	any	other
phenomena	such	as	our	conception	and	labelling.	The	
Madhyamaka
	schools	of
thought	refute	such	a	nature	of	existence	and	argue	that	nothing	exists	inherently,
for	nothing	can	be	found	to	exist	independently	from	conceptuality	and	labelling
when	scrutinised	through	an	ultimate	analysis.	The	
Madhyamaka
	schools	hold
that	things	exist	only	conventionally	and	their	existence	can	be	validated	only
within	 a	 relative	 framework	 of	 conventional	
reality
.	 Absence	 of	 such	 an
ontological	reality,	
i.e.
	the	absence	of	the	inherent	existence	of	all	phenomena,	is
defined	as	the	true	nature	of	
reality
,	
emptiness
,	by	the	
Madhyamaka
	schools
and	by	the	
tantras
.
	
Inner	Radiance
	
’od-gsal
,	Skt.	
prabhāsvara
Sometimes	also	translated	as	‘clear	light’,	the	Tibetan	term	
’od-gsal
,	which	has
been	rendered	here	as	‘inner	radiance’,	refers	in	the	context	of	the	
perfection
stage
	of	
meditation
	(Skt.	
sampannakrama
)	to	the	subtlest	level	of	mind,	
i.e.
	the
fundamental,	essential	nature	of	all	our	cognitive	events.	Though	ever	present
within	all	
sentient	beings
,	this	inner	radiance	becomes	manifest	only	when	the
gross	mind	has	ceased	to	function.	Such	a	dissolution	is	experienced	by	ordinary
beings,	naturally,	at	the	time	of	death,	but	it	can	also	be	experientially	cultivated
through	the	practices	of	
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantra
.	A	fundamental	distinction	is
made	between	the	inner	radiance	of	the	ground	(
gzhi’i	’od-gsal
)	and	the	inner
radiance	of	the	path	(
lam-gyi	’od-gsal
).	The	former,	which	is	also	known	as	the
‘mother	inner	radiance’	(
’od-gsal	ma
),	occurs	naturally	at	the	time	of	death,
when	it	indicates	the	presence	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
	(
dharmakāya
),
but	which	may	not	be	accompanied	by	an	awareness	of	its	nature.	The	latter,
which	is	also	known	as	the	‘child	inner	radiance’	(
’od-gsal	bu
)	is	an	awareness
of	 the	 ultimate	 nature	 of	 mind	 cultivated	 by	 the	 meditator	 in	 life,	
i.e.
	the
realisation	of	the	nature	of	the	‘mother	inner	radiance’	as	it	is	developed	in
meditation.	
Buddhahood
	is	achieved	when	the	‘mother	inner	radiance’	and
‘child	 inner	 radiance’	 conjoin.	 See	 Chapters	 8,	 10	 and	 11.	 Chapter	 11,	 in
particular,	differentiates	three	successive	phases	of	inner	radiance	which	are
experienced	at	the	time	of	death	and	immediately	thereafter:	the	primary	inner
radiance	(
bar-do	dang-po	chos-nyid	’od-gsal
),	which	is	identified	with	the	inner

radiance	of	the	ground,	the	secondary	inner	radiance	(
bar-do	’od-gsal	gnyis-pa
),
which	is	identified	with	the	inner	radiance	of	the	path,	and	the	tertiary	inner
radiance	(
bar-do	’od-gsal	gsum-pa
),	which	is	identified	with	the	subsequent
arising	of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	during	the	
intermediate	state	of
reality
	(
chos-nyid	bar-do
).
	
Inner	Tantras	of	Skilful	Means
	
nang	thabs-kyi	rgyud
The	collective	name	for	the	
tantras
	of	
Mahāyoga
,	
Anuyoga
	and	
Atiyoga
.	See
also	under	
Vehicle
.
	
Intentional	Lineage	of	the	Conquerors
	
rgyal-ba	dgongs-pa’i	brgyud-pa
According	to	the	
Nyingma
	school,	the	Buddhist	teachings	are	said	to	have	been
transmitted	through	six	
lineages
	(
brgyud-pa	drug
).	Among	these,	the	first,	which
is	known	as	the	‘intentional	lineage	of	the	conquerors’,	refers	to	the	
enlightened
intention
	(
dgongs-pa
)	of	
Samantabhadra
,	which	confers	the	realisation	of	the
atemporal	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	as	a	blessing	upon	the	male	and	female
buddhas
	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
.
	
Intermediate	State
	
bar-do
,	Skt.	
antarābhava
The	 original	 usage	 of	 the	 term	 within	 the	 literature	 of	 classical	 Buddhist
abhidharma
	
suggests	that	it	referred	exclusively	to	the	period	between	the	time
of	death	and	the	time	of	rebirth.	According	to	the	
Nyingma
	and	
Kagyu
	schools,
however,	the	term	‘intermediate	state’	refers	to	key	phases	of	life	and	death
identified	 as:	 the	
intermediate	 state	 of	 living
	 (
rang-bzhin	 bar-do
),	 the
intermediate	 state	 of	 meditative	 concentration
	
(
bsam-gtan	 bar-do
),	 the
intermediate	state	of	dreams
	(
rmi-lam	bar-do
),	the	
intermediate	state	of	the
time	of	death
	(
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
),	
the	intermediate	state	of	reality
	(
chos-nyid
bar-do
)	and	the	
intermediate	state	of	rebirth
	(
srid-pa’i	bar-do
).	During	each	of
these	phases,	the	consciousness	of	a	
sentient	being
	has	particular	experiential
qualities,	and	corresponding	to	these	qualities	of	experience	there	are	specific
meditative	techniques	conducive	to	realisation	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and
phenomena.	See	Chapter	3	and	individual	entries	below.
	
Intermediate	State	of	Dreams
	
rmi-lam	bar-do
The	intermediate	state	of	dreams	begins	from	the	moment	of	falling	asleep	and
ends	when	we	awake.	This	intermediate	state	offers	the	opportunity	for	the
practitioner	to	recognise	the	similarity	between	the	illusory	nature	of	dreams	and

that	of	our	waking	state.	This	practice	is	cultivated	in	the	context	of	
dream	yoga
where	the	ability	to	maintain	awareness	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and
phenomena	during	both	deep	sleep	and	dreaming	is	refined.
	
Intermediate	State	of	Living
	
rang-bzhin	bar-do
The	intermediate	state	of	living	begins	at	the	time	of	birth	and	continues	until	the
time	of	 death.	 Having	obtained	 a	 precious	human	 form	with	the	 ability	 to
recognise	our	actual	condition,	the	opportunity	arises	to	adopt	a	way	of	life	and
to	engage	in	the	practices	that	lead	to	
buddhahood
.	See	Chapters	3	and	1,	2,	4,
5,	6	and	7.
	
Intermediate	State	of	Meditative	Concentration
	
bsam-gtan	bar-do
The	intermediate	state	of	meditative	concentration	entered	during	the	waking
state	 provides	 the	 opportunity	 for	 the	 practitioner	 to	 cultivate	
meditative
equipose
	(
samāhita
	
,	Tib.	
mnyam-bzhag
)	and	thereby	to	achieve	stability	in	the
generation
	 and	
perfection	 stages
	 of	 meditation.	 This	 in	 turn	 deepens	 an
unbroken	awareness	of	the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	and	phenomena	in	post-
meditative	activities	and	prepares	the	meditator	for	the	
intermediate	state	of	the
time	of	death
.	See	Chapters	3	and	1,	2,	4,	5,	6	and	7.
	
Intermediate	State	of	Reality
	
chos-nyid	bar-do
The	intermediate	state	of	actual	reality	arises	after	the	
intermediate	state	of	the
time	of	death
	(
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
)	and	before	the	
intermediate	state	of	rebirth
(
srid-pa’i	
bar-do
).	Here	the	opportunity	occurs,	based	on	the	practices	adopted
during	 one’s	 lifetime,	 to	 recognise	 the	
natural	 purity
	 and	
natural
transformation
	 qualities	 of	 the	 ultimate	 nature	 of	 mind	 in	 the	 form	 of
luminosities,	rays,	sounds	and	
meditational	deities
.	See	Chapters	3	and	1	1.
	
Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
	
srid-pa’i	bar-do
The	intermediate	state	of	rebirth	is	entered	after	the	
intermediate	state	of
reality
	
when	the	consciousness	arises	in	the	form	of	a	
mental	body
,	conditioned
by	the	individual’s	inheritance	of	
past	actions
,	and	the	individual	begins	to
experience	both	the	surroundings	where	he	or	she	died	and	the	unfolding	of
experiential	states	driven	by	the	momentum	of	
past	actions
.	If	
liberation
	from
cyclic	existence
	is	not	achieved	during	this	intermediate	state	it	comes	to	an	end
at	the	moment	of	conception.	Since	consciousness	is	said	to	possess	certain
heightened	qualities	during	this	period	there	is	a	potential	to	achieve	
liberation
,

or	at	the	very	least	a	favourable	rebirth,	at	various	key	stages	as	this	state	is
traversed.	See	Chapters	3	and	1	1.
	
Intermediate	State	of	the	Tme	of	Death
	
’chi-kha’i	bar-do
The	intermediate	state	of	the	time	of	death	is	entered	at	the	time	when	the
process	of	dying	definitively	begins,	and	ends	with	the	onset	of	the	
intermediate
state	of	reality
.	It	includes	the	gradual	dissolution	of	the	five	elements	and	their
associated	modes	of	consciousness	and	culminates	with	the	arising	of	the	
inner
radiante
	of	the	ground	(
gzhi’i	’od-gsal
).	The	natural	arising	of	
inner	radiance
immediately	after	respiration	ceases	is	regarded	as	a	supreme	opportunity	to
realise	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
.	See	Chapters	3,	8,	10	and	1	1.
	
Intrinsic	Awareness
	
rang-rig
,	Skt.	
svasaṃvitti/svasaṃvedana
According	to	Indian	Buddhist	epistemology,	and	particularly	in	the	writings	of
the	great	logicians	
Dignāga
	and	
Dharmak
ῑ
rti
,	the	term	
svasaṃvedana
	refers	to
the	apperceptive	or	reflexive	faculty	of	consciousness,	for	which	reason	it	is
sometimes	 rendered	 as	 ‘reflexive	 awareness’	 or	 ‘apperceptive	 awareness’.
However,	in	the	view	of	the	
Great	Perfection
	(
rdzogs-pa	chen-po
)	and	in	the
context	of	the	present	work,	the	same	term	refers	to	the	fundamental	innate	mind
in	its	natural	state	of	spontaneity	and	purity,	beyond	the	alternating	states	of
motion	and	rest	and	the	subject-object	dichotomy.	It	is	therefore	rendered	here	as
‘intrinsic	awareness’.	As	such,	intrinsic	awareness	gives	the	meditator	access	to
pristine	cognition
	or	the	
biddha-mind
	itself,	and	it	stands	in	direct	contrast	to
fundamental	ignorance
	(
avidyā
	
),	which	is	the	primary	cause	of	rebirth	in
cyclic	existence
	(
saṃsāra
).	The	direct	
introduction
	to	intrinsic	awareness	is	a
distinctive	teaching	within	the	
Nyingma
	
school	and	the	principal	subject	matter
of	Chapter	4.	This	practice	is	a	central	component	of	the	
Esoteric	Instructional
Class
	(
upadeśa
)	of	
Atiyoga
,	where	it	is	known	as	
Cutting	throuth	Resistance
(
khregs-chod
).	See	also	
Awareness
	and	
Mind
.
	
Intrinsic	Awareness	which	is	Pristine	Cognition
	
rang	rig-pa’i	ye-shes
Generally	this	term	refers	to	the	
pristine	cognition
	arising	from	the	direct
realisation	of	
emptiness
	by	a	
sublime	being
	(
ārya
,	 Tib.	
’phags-pa
)	 in	 the
context	of	deep	
meditative	equipoise
.	This	is	so	called	because	the	nature	and
qualities	of	that	experience	can	never	be	fully	conveyed	by	means	of	language
and	words	but	remains	totally	evident	to	the	
yogin
	himself.	In	the	context	of	the
Great	 Perfection
	 however,	 as	 exemplified	 by	 our	 text,	 the	 fusion	 of	 the

meditator’s	intrinsic	awareness	with	the	pristine	cognition	of	
buddha-mind
indicates	not	only	that	intrinsic	awareness	
provides	access	to	
buddha-mind
,	but
that	the	identity	of	the	two	has	been	fully	realised.	See	also	
Intrinsic	Awareness
and	
Pristine	Cognition
.
	
Introduction
	
ngo-sprod
A	genre	of	pith	instructions	in	which	the	nature	of	
actual	reality
	or	
intrinsic
awareness
	
is	formally	introduced	(
rig-pa’i	ngo-sprod
),	in	a	clear	immediate
manner,	by	a	qualified	
spuritual	teacher
.	See	Chapter	4.
	
Invitation
	
spyan-’dren-pa
,	Skt.	
upanimantraṇa
	
The	term	‘invitation’	refers	to
the	meditative	process	of	the	
tantras
,	whereby	the	actual	
meditational	deity
	or
Being	of	Pristine	Cognition
	(	
jñānasattva
,	Tib.	
ye-shes	sems-dpa’
)	is	formally
invited	by	the	meditator	to	enter	into	the	previously	visualised	form,	known	as
the	
Being	of	Commitment
	(
samayasattva
,	Tib.	
dam-tshig	sems-dpa’
).
	
Jambudvīpa
	
’dzam-bu	gling
See	under	
Four	Continents	and	Eght	Subcontinents
.
	
Kagyu
	
bka’-brgyud
One	of	the	four	main	traditions	or	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.	The	
Kagyu
lineage	tradition	stems	from	the	great	
acomplished	masters
	(
mahāsiddha
)	of
India	such	as	
Tilopa
,	
Naropa
	and	
Maitripa
	through	to	
Khyungpo	Neljor
,	who
founded	the	
Shangpa	Kagyu
	lineage,	and	
Marpa	Lotsāwa
,	who	formed	the
Dagpo	Kagyu
	lineage.	The	latter	comprises	four	major	sub-schools,	namely	the
Karmapa
,	the	
Tshalpa
,	the	
Barompa
	and	the	
Phagmodrupa
,	the	last	of	which	is
further	divided	into	the	branches	of	the	
Drigungpa
,	
Taglungpa
,	
Drukpa
,	
Yazang
,
Trophu
,	
Shugseb
,	
Yelpa
,	and	
Martshang
.	These	traditions	integrate	practices
derived	from	both	the	
sūtras
	
and	the	
tantras
.	There	is	a	particular	emphasis	on
the	
Great	 Seal
(
Mahāmudrā
)	 system	 of	 practice	 and	 on	
perfection	 stage
practices	such	as	the	Six	Yogas	of	
Naropa
.
	
Kāmarūpa
	
ka-ma	ru-pa
A	traditional	name	corresponding	to	parts	of	modern	
Assam
	in	north-east	India
and	the	adjacent	
Sylhet
	region	of	Bangladesh.
	

Kangyur	and	Tengyur
	
bka’-bstan	rnam-gnyis
The	
Kangyur
	is	the	Tibetan	Buddhist	canon	containing	the	original	
sūtras
	and
tantras
	translated	from	Indian	sources.	The	
Kangyur
,	as	we	now	know	it,	was
formalised	as	a	complete	collection	by	the	great	fourteenth-century	Tibetan
scholar	and	encyclopaedist	
Buton	Rinchendrub
.	
Buton
	was	also	instrumental	in
the	compilation	of	the	
Tengyur
,	the	canonical	collection	containing	translations
of	authoritative	Indian	commentarial	works.	Many	manuscript	versions	of	these
anthologies	were	prepared	over	the	centuries,	and	important	xylographic	editions
were	 published	 at	
Narthang
,	
Derge
,	
Lhasa
,	
Litang
,	
Cho-ne
,	 and	
Beijing
.
‘
Kangyur
’	(
bka’-’gyur
)	literally	means	the	translated	sacred	words	or	transmitted
precepts	 of	 the	
buddhas
,	 and	 ‘
Tengyur
’	 (
bstan-’gyur
),	 the	 translated
commentaries.
	
Kaṅkaṇīdhāraṇī
	
kaṅ-ka-ṇ
ῑ
	gzungs
The	name	of	an	incantation	text	associated	with	
Akṣobhya-Vajrasattva
,	through
which	offerings	are	made	on	behalf	of	the	deceased.
	
Karma
	
las
See	
Past	Actions
.
	
Karma	Family
	
las-kyi	rigs
,	Skt.	
karmakula
One	of	the	
five	enlightened	families
	(
pañcakula
)	into	which	the	
meditational
deities
	
of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	are	subdivided.	The	deities	of
the	
Karma
	
family	include	the	peaceful	
buddhas
	
Amoghasiddhi
	and	
Samayatārā
and	the	corresponding	wrathful	aspects	
Karma	Heruka
	and	
Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ
.
See	Appendix	Two.
	
Karma	Lingpa
	
karma	gling-pa
Karma	Lingpa
	(	
fl
.	fourteenth	century)	is	the	
treasure-finder
	who	extracted
from	Mt	
Gampodar
	in	
Dakpo
	the	cycle	of	teachings	known	as	the	
Peaceful	and
Wrathful	Deities:	A	Pro	found	Sacred	Teaching,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation
through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
	(
Zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
	),
to	which	our	present	text	belongs.	See	Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary	History’.
	
Karmaprasiddhi
	
byang-phyogs	las-rab	brtsegs-pa’i	zhing-khams
The	 northern	
buddha	 field
	 of	 the	 ‘Mound	 of	 Excellent	 Activities’

(
Karmaprakūṭa
),	otherwise	known	as	the	‘Matrix	of	Enlightened	Activities’
(Tib.	
las-rab	grub-pa
,	Skt.	
Karmaprasiddhi
),	is	the	paradise	presided	over	by	the
male	
buddha
	Amoghasiddhi
	
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Kāya
	
sku
	
See	
Buddha-body
.
	
khaṭvāṅga
	
khaṭ
-vāṅga
	
Literally	meaning	‘bedpost’,	the	
khaṭvāṅga
	is	a	tantric
staff,	comprising	a	long	eight-sided	shaft	of	white	sandalwood,	sealed	with	a
half-
vajra
	at	its	base,	and	a	crossed-
vajra
	at	its	top,	replete	with	streamers	and
surmounted	by	stacked	skulls	and	human	heads,	indicative	of	the	energy	centres
of	body,	speech	and	mind	within	the	
sbtle	body
.	In	general,	the	
khaṭvāṅga
symbolises	the	union	of	great	bliss	and	emptiness.
	
King	Spirits
	
rgyal-po
A	class	of	male	spirits	who	are	said	to	have	assumed	their	particular	forms
through	a	preponderance	of	anger	and	hatred.	Their	many	mundane	forms	are	to
be	differentiated	from	the	five	supramundane	forms	of	the	
protector
	deity	Pehar
(
rgyal-po	sku	lnga
),	which	are	respectively	known	as	the	kings	of	body,	speech,
mind,	attributes	and	activities.
	
Kriyātantra
	
bya-ba’i	rgyud
The	first	of	the	three	outer	classes	of	
tantra
,	which	form	one	subcategory	of	the
six	classes	of	
tantra
,	and	the	fourth	of	the	
nine	vehicles
,	according	to	the
Nyingma
	
school	 of	 Tibetan	 Buddhism.	
Kriyātantra
	 emphasises	 outer	 ritual
practices	 such	 as	 the	 making	 of	 offerings,	 prostration,	 and	 praises	 to	 the
meditational	deity
	visualised	in	the	space	before	one.
	
KYE	HO
	
kye-ho
An	exclamation	of	astonishment	or	wonder.
	
Lake-dwelling	Medicinal	Spirits
	
mtsho-sman/’tsho-sman
A	group	of	five,	seven	or	nine	female	spirits	of	the	
sman-mo
	class	who	dwell	in
lakes,	and	who	are	differentiated	from	the	sky-dwelling	medicinal	spirits	(
nam-
mkha’i	sman-mo
),	the	earth-dwelling	medicinal	spirits	(
sa’i	sman-mo
),	and	the
hybrid	serpentine-medicinal	spirits	(
klu-sman
).	In	general,	the	
sman-mo
	are	a
category	
of	 indigenous	 Tibetan	 spirits,	 to	 whom	 medicinal	
torma-
offerings

(
sman-gtor
),	compounded	of	medicines,	nectars	and	blood,	are	made.	Foremost
among	them	are	the	five	sisters	of	longevity	(
tshe-ring	mched-lnga
),	who	are
embodied	in	the	five	main	snow	peaks	of	the	Everest	range.	The	most	powerful
of	these	medicinal	spirits	are	said	to	have	been	bound	under	an	oath	of	allegiance
by	
Padmasambhava
	at	Silma	in	Tsang.
	
Lay	Vows
	
dge-bsnyen-gyi	sdom-pa
,	Skt.	
upāsakavrata
See	
Prātimokṣa
	and	
Vows
.
	
Lesser	Vehicle
	
theg-dman
,	Skt.	
h
ῑ
nayāna
See	
Greater	Vehicle
,	
Hermit	Buddhas
	and	
Pious	Attendants
.
	
‘Liberating’	Avengers
	
sgrol-ging
This	is	the	name	of	a	class	of	male	sword-wielding	spirits,	collectively	known	as
the	
skyes-bu	ging-chen
,	who	are	invoked	in	order	to	enact	the	wrathful	
rites	of
‘liberation
’.
	
Liberation
	
grol-ba/sgrol-ba
,	Skt.	
mokṣa
In	a	Buddhist	context,	the	term	liberation	refers	specifically	to	freedom	from
cyclic	existence
,	the	karmically	conditioned	cycle	of	death	and	rebirth,	and
consequently	to	freedom	from	all	forms	of	physical	and	mental	
suffering
.	Such
a	liberation	can	be	attained	only	through	the	total	elimination	of	
fundamental
ignorance
	 and	 the	
dissonant	 mental	 states
,	 including	
attachment
	 and
aversion
,	which	afflict	the	mind	and	perpetuate	the	cycle	of	existence.
	
Lifelong	Companion	Gods
	
’go-ba’i	lha
This	is	a	category	of	spirits	who	are	said	to	accompany	an	individual	throughout
his	or	her	life,	like	a	shadow,	protecting	the	vitality	(
bla
)	of	the	individual.	Five
types	of	lifelong	companion	god	(
’go-ba’i	lha	lnga
)	are	specifically	identified:
the	gods	of	the	life-essence	(
srog-gi-lha
),	the	gods	of	masculinity	(
pho-lha
),	the
gods	of	femininity	(
mo-lha
),	the	gods	of	the	countryside	(
yul-lha
),	and	the	gods
of	inimical	force	(
dgra-lha
).
	
Lineage
	
brgyud-pa
,	Skt.	
paraṃparā
An	unbroken	line	of	successive	teachers	through	whom	the	Buddhist	teachings
are	transmitted.	According	to	the	
Nyingma
	tradition,	six	forms	of	lineage	are

described:	1)	the	
intentional	lineage	of	the	conquerors
	(
rgyal-ba’i	dgongs-
brgyud
),	 through	 which	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality
	 communicates	 the
teachings	to	the	
Buiddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
;	2)	the	
symbolic	lineage	of
awareness	holders
	(
rig-’dzin	brda’i	brgyud-pa
),	through	which	non-human	and
human	
awareness	 holders
	 of	 the	 highest	
spiritual	 accomplishements
symbolically	receive	the	teachings	from	
bodhisattvas
	of	the	tenth	level;	3)	the
aural	lineage	of	authoritative	personages	(
gang-zag	snyankhung-gi	brgyud-pa
),
through	which	
accomplished	masters
	orally	transmit	the	teachings	from	one
generation	to	the	next;	4)	the	lineage	empowered	by	enlightened	aspiration
(
smon-lam	dbang-bskur-gyi	brgyud-pa
),	 through	 which	 a	
treasure-finder
	
of
concealed	texts	is	identified	by	their	concealer’s	solemn	affirmation,	5	)	the
lineage	of	prophetically	declared	spiritual	succession	(
bka’-babs	lung-bstan-gyi
brgyud-pa
),	through	which	a	
treasure-fnder
	of	concealed	texts	is	identified
from	the	authoritative	prophesies	of	
Padmasambhava
,	and	6)	the	lineage	of	the
ḍākin
ῑ
’s	seal	of	entrustment	(
mkha’-’gro	gtad-rgya’i	brgyud-pa
	),	through	which
a	
treasure-finder
	is	
granted	codified	teachings	by	the	lords	of	the	
treasure
	in
fulfilment	of	the	concealer’s	former	aspiration.
	
Lineage	Holder
	
brgyud-pa’i	’dzin-pa
,	Skt.	
paraṃparādhara
One	who	maintains	any	of	the	six	
lineages
	and	takes	responsibility	for	their
continued	
transmission
	from	one	generation	to	the	next.	See	previous	entry.
	
Longchen	Rabjampa
	
klong-chen	rab-’byams-pa
A	prolific	writer	(1308	-	63),	regarded	as	one	of	the	greatest	masters	of	the
Nyingma
	
school,	
Longchen	 Rabjampa
	 is	 renowned	 for	 his	 systematic
commentaries	 on	 the	
nine	 vehicles
,	 the	 perspective	 of	
Atiyoga
,	 and	 his
revelation	 of	 the	 texts	 and	 practices	 contained	 in	 the	
Four-part	 Innermost
Spirituality
	(
sNying-thig	ya-bzhi
).	His	commentary	on	the	
Guhyagarbhatantra
,
entitled	
Dispelling	the	Darkness	of	the	Ten	Directions
	(
Phyogs-bcu’i	mun-sel
),	is
an	important	source,	clarifying	the	
maṇḍala
	
of	the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
and	the	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
	from	the	perspectives	of	the	
ground
,	
path
,
and	result.
	
Lotus
	
padma
In	Buddhist	poetry	and	the	visual	arts	the	lotus,	particularly	the	variety	which
grows	in	water,	is	often	used	as	a	symbol	of	purity.	The	lotus	grows	from	an
unclean	mire,	yet	it	is	clean	and	unpolluted	by	the	mire	surrounding	it.	One	finds

the	 lotus	 depicted	 as	 the	 cushion	 or	 seat	 of	 many	
meditational	 deities
	 in
Buddhist	
tantric
	iconography.	Among	the	
five	enlightened	families
,	the	
Padma
or	Lotus	family	(
padma’i	rigs
)	is	that	of	the	
buddha
	Amitābha
.
	
Lotus	Light	Palace
	
padma	’od-kyi	pho-brang
The	palace	or	operational	field	of	
Padmasambhava
.	See	under	
Maṇḍala
.
	
Love/Loing	Kindness
	
byams-pa
,	Skt.	
maitr
ῑ
In	 a	 Buddhist	 context,	 loving	 kindness	 is	 defined	 as	 a	
mentalfactor
characterised	by	a	sincere	wish	that	others	enjoy	happiness.	According	to	this
definition,	love	is	one	of	the	eleven	‘wholesome	
mental	factors
’	categorised	in
the	
abhidharma
	literature.	However,	in	the	case	of	the	
four	immeasurable
aspirations
,	the	word	love	is	used	as	an	abbreviation	for	‘great	love’	(
byams-pa
chen-po
,	Skt.	
mahāmaitr
ῑ
)	which	refers	to	an	altruistic	mental	attitude	that	is
unbiased	in	its	love	towards	all	beings	and	is	also	spontaneous	and	natural.	It	is
said	that	such	a	spontaneous	sense	of	universal	or	unqualified	love	can	only	arise
as	 a	 result	 of	 a	 systematic	 meditative	 training	 and	 an	 understanding	 of
emptiness
.
	
Lower	Existences
	
ngan-song
,	Skt.	
durgati
The	realms	of	the	animals,	
anguished	spirits
,	and	
hells
.
	
Lower	Vital	Energy
	
’og-gi	rlung
The	vital	energy	located	at	the	lower	extremity	of	the	central	
energy	channel
within	the	
subtle	body
.	See	
VitalEnergy
.
	
Madhyamaka
	
dbu-ma
Derived	from	the	Sanskrit	expression	
madhyamapratipad
,	meaning	the	‘Middle
Way’	between	the	extremes	of	
eternalism
	and	
nihilism
,	which	was	expounded
by	
Sākyamuni	Buddha
	in	the	earliest	
sūtras
,	
Madhyamaka
	(
dbu-ma
)	is	the
name	of	one	of	the	most	influential	among	the	four	classical	schools	of	Indian
Buddhist	philosophy.	Within	the	context	of	the	
Madhyamaka
	school,	the	Middle
Way	refers	to	the	doctrine	of	
emptiness
	(
śūnyatā
),	which	is	held	to	be	the
ultimate	nature	of	all	
things.	According	to	this	view,	all	phenomena,	whether
mental	 or	 physical,	 cannot	 be	 found	 to	 possess	 any	 independent	 or	 self-
validating	natures,	and	their	existence	and	identity	are	regarded	as	valid	only

within	a	relative	framework	of	worldly	convention.	Further,	it	is	propounded	that
not	only	do	phenomena	exist	solely	in	dependence	upon	causes	and	conditions,
but	even	their	identities	depend	on	conceptions	and	labelling.	Nevertheless,	this
school	 holds	 that,	 unlike	 mere	 fantasies,	 such	 as	 unicorns	 for	 example,
phenomena	do	exist	conventionally	and	their	ontology	must	be	accepted	as	valid.
Such	a	metaphysical	position	is	designated	the	‘Middle	Way’	in	that	it	is	the	mid-
point	between	the	extremes	of	total	non-existence	of	
reality
,	or	
nihilism
,	and	the
positing	 of	 an	 absolute,	 independent	 existence	 of	
reality
,	 or	
eternalism
.
Founded	by	
Nāgārjuna
	in	the	second	century	AD,	the	
Madhyamaka
	
school	later
evolved	two	subdivisions:	
Prāsaṅgika
	and	
Svātantrika
,	based	on	the	different
interpretations	of	
Nāgārjuna
’s	views	which	were	made	by	
Buddhapālita
	
(later
elucidated	by	
Candrak
ῑ
rti
)	and	
Bhavaviveka
	respectively.	The	Tibetan	tradition,
while	recognising	
Bhavaviveka
’s	important	contribution	to	Buddhist	logic	and
philosophy,	considers	the	
Prāsaṅgika
	technique	of	
reductio	ad	absurdum
	to	be
the	 most	 refined	 logical	 method	 in	 Buddhism	 for	 establishing	 the	 view	 of
emptiness
.	The	distinctive	feature	of	the	
Prāsaṅgika
	school	is	its	total	denial	of
any	 ontology	 implying	
inherent	 existence
	 of	 either	 external	 objects	 or
subjective	
conssciousness
.	 There	 is	 also,	 according	 to	 some	 Tibetan
interpretations,	the	tradition	known	as	the	Great	
Madhyamaka
	which	in	the
course	of	meditative	insight	distinguishes	between	the	intrinsic	
emptiness
	of
phenomena	(
rang-stong
)	and	the	extrinsic	
emptiness
	of	pure	
buddha	attributes
(
gzhan-stong
).
	
Magical	Net
	
sgyu-’phrul	drva-ba
,	Skt.	
Māyājāla
The	most	all-embracing	cycle	of	texts	among	the	eighteen	
Mahāyoga	tantras
,
focusing	specifically	on	the	
maṇḍala
	of	the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
	and	the
fifty-eight	
wrathful	 deities
,	 and	 including	 within	 its	 corpus	 the
Guhyagarbhatantra
.	As	such,	it	is	the	basis	for	all	subsequent	expositions	of
this	particular	
maṇḍala
,	including	the	present	work.	See	Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief
Literary	History’.
	
Magon	Chamdrel
	
ma-mgon	lcam-dral
An	epithet	of	the	protectress	
Ekajaṭ
ῑ
	and	
Dorje	Lekpa
,	who	are	revered	as	the
foremost	supramundane	
protector
	deities,	according	to	the	
Atiyoga
	tradition	of
the	
Nyingma
	school.
	
Mahākāla
	
mgon-po	nag-po

The	supramundane	
protector
	deity	
Mahākāla
	is	a	
wrathful
	manifestation	of
Avalokiteśvara
	
.	 The	 meditative	 practices	 associated	 with	 this	 protector	 are
popular	in	all	four	traditions	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.
	
Mahākaruṇika
	
thugs-rje	chen-po
	
The	thousand-armed	form	of	
Avalokiteśvara
.
See	
Aalokiteśvara
.
	
Mahāyāna
	
theg-pa	chen-po
See	
Greater	Vehicle
.
	
Mahāyoga
	
rnal-’byor	chen-po’i	rgyud
The	seventh	of	the	
nine	vehicles
,	and	first	of	the	three	inner	classes	of	
tantras
,
according	to	the	
Nyingma
	school.	
Mahāyoga
	emphasises	the	
generation	stage
of	meditation	(
utpattikrama
)	and	the	gradual	visualisation	of	elaborate	
maṇḍalas
of	 deities.	 It	 comprises	 eighteen	 basic	
tantras
,	 such	 as	
Guhyagarbha
,
Guhyasamāja
,	
and	
Buddhasamāyoga
,	as	well	as	a	vast	number	of	
tantra
	texts
associated	with	the	so-called	eight	classes	of	
means	for	attainment
	(
sgrub-pa
bka’-brgyad
),	which	focus	respectively	on	the	deities	
Yamāntaka
,	
Hayagr
ῑ
va
,
Sr
ῑ
heruka
,	
Vajrāmrta
,	
Vajrak
ῑ
la
,	
Mātaraḥ
,	
Lokastotrapūjā
	 (
’jig-rten	 mchod-
bstod
),	 and	
Vajramantrabhiru
	 (
rmod-pa	 drag-sngags
).	 These	 texts	 are	 all
contained	in	the	
Collected	Tantras	of	the	Nyingmapa
	
(
rNying-ma’i	rgyud-’bum
),
and	a	small	but	important	selection	of	them	is	also	contained	in	the	
Kangyur
.
	
Maitreya
	
rgyal-ba	byams-pa
Maitreya
	is	the	embodiment	of	the	great	
loving	kindness
	(
mahāmaitr
ῑ
)	of	all	the
buddhas
,	as	visualised	in	the	form	of	a	
meditational	deity
.	
Maitreya
	therefore
represents	the	perfected	state	of	the	faculty	of	
love
/
oving	kindness
	inherent
within	each	individual’s	mental	continuum.	In	addition,	
Maitreya
	is	also	revered
as	an	eminent	historical	figure,	a	
bodhisattva
	who	was	one	of	the	eight	principal
bodhisattva
	
disciples	of	
Sākyamuni	Buddha
.	It	is	to	him	that	the	
Five	Works
	of
Maitreya
	
(
Byams-chos	sde-lnga
)	are	attributed.	According	to	the	classical	
sūtra
literature	it	is	the	
bodhisattva
	Maitreya
	who	is	the	coming	
buddha
,	fifth	in	the
line	of	one	thousand	
buddhas
	(
Sākyamuni
	being	the	fourth)	who	will	descend
to	this	world	during	the	
aspicious	aeon
.	Currently	he	is	said	to	be	residing	in	the
god
	realm	of	
Tuṣita
.	He	is	also	one	of	the	four	outer	male	
bodhisattvas
	among
the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
.	See	Appendix	Two.

	
Major	and	Minor	Marks
	
mtshan-dpe
,	Skt.	
laks
an
ānuvyañjana
The	
Buddha-body	of	Supreme	Emanation
	is	characterised	by	thirty-two	major
marks	 (Skt.	
dvātriṃ
śan-mahāpuruṣalaks
aṇa
)	 and	 eighty	 minor	 marks	 (Skt.
as
ῑ
tyanuvyañjana
),	 which	 are	 all	 enumerated	 in	
Maitreya
’s	
Ornament	 of
Emergent	 Realisation
	 (
Abhisamayālaṃkāra
,	 T	 3786,	 vv.	 13-17	 and	 21-32).
These	 include	 an	 array	 of	 perfected	 features	 of	 body	 and	 speech,	 which
according	to	the	commentaries	are	the	specific	results	of	diverse	aspects	of	a
buddha
’s	conduct.
	
Malevolent/Beguiling	Forces
	
bdud
,	Skt.	
māra
Buddhist	literature	speaks	of	four	kinds	of	beguiling	influences	which	are	the
obstacles	that	impede	one’s	spiritual	transformation.	These	are	the	influence	of:
our	impure	psycho-physical	
aggregates
	(
skandha
);	our	
dissonant	mentalstates
(
kleśa
);	deva’s	son	(
devaputra
),	which	refers	to	sensual	desires	and	temptations;
and	the	lord	of	death	(
mṛtyupati
),	which	refers	to	ordinary	death,	at	the	point	of
which	 rebirth	 in	 cyclic	 existence	 continues	 rather	 than	 the	 attainment	 of
buddhahood
.	As	recorded	in	the	life	of	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
,	these	archetypal
forces	projected	images	of	desire	and	terror	which	were	designed	to	interrupt	his
mediative	 equipoise
,	 just	 prior	 to	 his	 attainment	 of	 manifestly	 perfect
buddhahood
	at	
Bodhgaya
	in	India.
	
Maṇḍala
	
dkyil-‘khor
The	Sanskrit	word	‘
maṇḍala
’	conveys	a	number	of	meanings	-	circle,	wheel,
circumference,	totality,	assembly	or	literary	corpus.	In	the	context	of	
Anuyoga
and	
Atiyoga
,	the	expression	‘three	
maṇḍalas
’	specifically	refers	to	the	scope	of
buddha-body
,	
speech
	and	
mind
.	Then,	in	a	more	general	usage,	this	term
indicates	the	central	(
dkyil
)	and	peripheral	(
’khor
)	deities	described	in	the	
tantra
texts.	These	deities	reside	within	a	celestial	palace	(
vimāṇa
),	which	generally	has
a	 perfectly	 symmetrical	 design	 -	 with	 four	 gateways	 and	 four	 main	 walls
composed	of	five	layers	of	different	colours,	each	of	the	features	corresponding
to	a	particular	aspect	of	the	principal	deity’s,	and	thereby	to	the	meditator’s,	pure
awareness
	and	purity	of	perception.	
The	
maṇḍala
	thus	represents	a	perfected
state	of	being	and	perception	encompassing	all	phenomena.	The	celestial	palace
itself	and	the	deities	within	it	symbolise	the	perfected	states	of	the	meditator’s
own	
awareness
,	psycho-physical	
aggregates
,	elemental	properties,	sensory	and
mental	processes,	
etc.
	When	such	
maṇḍalas
	are	represented	symbolically,	they

may	take	the	form	of	a	two-dimensional	image	on	painted	cloth,	or	they	may	be
made	of	coloured	sand,	or	else	constructed	as	a	three-dimensional	structure,
carved	from	wood	or	other	materials.	The	visualisation	of	
maṇḍalas
	in	their
three-dimensional	 form	 plays	 a	 crucial	 role	 in	 the	
generation	 stage
	 of
meditation.	 Here,	 these	 ‘abodes	 of	 the	 deity’	 are	 never	 perceived	 of	 as
independently	existing	universes	but	as	manifestations	of	the	
pristine	cognition
of	the	principal	
meditational	deity
	being	meditated	upon.	The	symbolism	of	the
maṇḍala
	of	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
	and	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
,	as	it
relates	to	our	text,	is	given	in	Appendix	Two.
	
Maṇḍala	of	Offeringss
	
mchod-pa’i	maṇḍal
The	
maṇḍala
	of	offerings	is	one	of	the	
preliminary	practices
	(
sngon-’gro
),	in
which	offerings	are	visualised	and	offered	to	the	
spiritual	teacher
,	
meditational
deity
	or	
Three	Precious	Jewels
.	In	general,	there	are	outer,	inner,	and	secret
man
d
ala
	offerings,	corresponding	to	the	
Three	Buddha-bodies
	of	
emanation
,
perfect	resource
	and	
actual	reality
.	In	the	first,	the	entire	external	material
universe,	symbolised	by	Mount	
Sumeru
	and	the	
four	continents
,	etc.,	is	offered,
usually	using	a	circular	metal	base	on	which	are	arranged	small	heaps	of	rice;
second,	the	inner	
maṇḍala
	of	offerings	comprises	the	
subtle	body
,	complete
with	its	
energy	channels
,	currents	of	
vital	energy
	and	
seminal	points
;	and,
third,	the	secret	
maṇḍala
	of	offerings	is	that	of	
actualreality
	or	the	ultimate
nature	of	
mind
.	In	the	
preliminary	practices
	all	these	are	offered	one	hundred
thousand	times	as	an	antidote	for	
attachment
.
	
Mañjuśrī
	
’jam-dpal
Mañjuśr
ῑ
	 is	 the	 embodiment	 of	 the	
discriminative	 awareness
	 of	 all	 the
buddhas
,	manifesting	in	the	form	of	a	
meditational	deity
.	He	is	normally
depicted	in	his	seated	posture,	holding	a	sword	in	his	right	hand	(representing
discriminative	awareness
)	and	a	sacred	text	in	his	left	hand	(indicating	his
mastery	of	all	knowledge).	
Mañjuśr
ῑ
	is	also	revered	as	an	eminent	historical
figure	who	was	one	of	the	eight	principal	
bodhisattva
	disciples	of	the	
Buddha
;
and	he	is	also	one	of	the	four	outer	male	
bodhisattvas
	among	the	forty-two
peaceful	deities
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Mantra
	
sngags
The	Sanskrit	word	
mantra
	is	an	abbreviation	of	two	syllables	
mana
	and	
traya
,
respectively	meaning	‘mind’	and	‘protection’.	Hence	‘
mantra
’	literally	refers	to

‘protection	of	the	mind’.	The	essential	indication	here	is	the	protection	of	the
mind	from	the	overwhelming	influence	of	ordinary	perceptions	and	conceptions,
which	give	rise	to	deluded	states	of	existence,	thus	inhibiting	the	full	expression
of	
buddha	nature
.	More	specifically,	
mantra
	refers	to	the	pure	sound	which	is
the	perfected	speech	of	an	
enlightened
	being.	The	aim	of	the	
generation	stage
practices	is	the	cultivation	of	the	mode	of	being	of	the	
meditational	deity
,	that
is	to	say	the	transformation	of	mundane	body,	speech	and	mind	into	
buddha-
body
,	
speech
	and	
mind
.	This	is	supported	in	ritual	practice	by	the	enactment	of
the	hand-gestures	or	
seal
	(
mudrā
),	which	are	the	resonance	of	
buddha-body
,	by
mantra
	 recitation,	 which	 is	 the	 resonance	 of	
buddha-speech
,	 and	 by
visualisation,	which	is	the	resonance	of	
buddha-mind
.	In	general,	three	types	of
mantra
	 are	 differentiated:	
mantras
	 of	
retention	 (Skt.	
dhāraṇ
ῑ
,	 Tib.	
gzungs-
sngags
),	 gnostic	
mantras
	 (Skt.	
vidyāmantra
,	 Tib.	
rig-sngags
),	 and	 secret
mantras
	 (Skt.	
guhyamantra
,	 Tib.	
gsang-sngags
).	 Among	 these,	 the	 first
comprises	the	
mantras
	associated	with	the	
sūtras
	which	are	designed	to	intensify
discriminative	awareness
,	the	second	are	associated	with	specific	deities	of	the
outer	
tantras
,	 and	 designed	 to	 intensify	
skilful	means
,	 while	 the	 third	 are
associated	with	the	inner	
tantras
,	and	are	designed	to	intensify	the	
generation
stage
	
of	meditation.	The	term	‘secret	
mantra
’	is	also	utilised	as	a	synonym	for
the	
Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality
	(
Vajrayāna
).
	
Mantrin
	
sngags-pa
An	adept	of	the	vehicle	of	secret	
mantra
	
(
mantrayāna
)	in	general.	However,	the
word	
ngakpa
	(
sngags-pa
)	is	popularly	used	to	denote	those	practitioners	of
tantra
	
who	choose	to	maintain	a	family	life,	passing	on	their	teachings	through	a
familial	lineage,	in	contrast	to	the	celibate	life	of	a	monk	or	nun.
	
Māra
	
bdud
See	under	
Malevolent	/	Beguiling	Forces
.
	
Martial	Haunting	Spirits
	
btsan
A	class	of	ghostly	or	haunting	spirits,	often	depicted	as	armour-clad,	who	cause
colic	and	intestinal	disorders.	Foremost	among	them	are	
Tsimara
,	the	protector
of	
Samye
	monastery,	and	
Yamshu	Marpo
.	They	are	generally	depicted	as	red	in
colour,	brandishing	a	red	lance	with	a	red	flag	in	the	right	hand	and	throwing	a
red-coloured	snare	(
btsan-zhags
)	with	the	left	hand,	while	riding	a	red	horse.
	

Means	for	Attainment
	
sgrub-thabs
,	Skt.	
sādhana
The	literature	of	the	Buddhist	
tantras
	is	classified	into	
tantra
	texts	and	means
for	 attainment	 manuals.	 The	 former	 are	 general	 expositions	 concerning	 the
continua	of	the	ground,	path	and	ressult
	associated	with	a	particular	
maṇḍala
of	deities,	while	the	latter	are	specific	manuals	derived	from	and	inspired	by	the
former	as	the	detailed	means	for	attainment,	or	meditative	realisation,	of	a
specific	
maṇḍala
	of	deities.	Such	practices	have	four	phases,	which	are	often
known	 as	 the	
four	 aspects	 of	 ritual	 service	 and	 means	 for	 attainment
(
bsnyen-sgrub	yan-lag	bzhi
).
	
Meditation
	
sgom
,	Skt.	
bhāvanā
Meditation	is	defined	as	a	disciplined	mental	process	through	which	a	person
cultivates	familiarity	with	a	chosen	object,	be	it	an	external	object	like	an	image,
or	even	a	trivial	object	such	as	a	pebble,	etc.,	or	an	internal	object	such	as	one’s
own	mind	or	personal	identity.	According	to	the	
sūtras
,	there	are	two	main	types
of	meditation,	one	emphasising	the	faculty	of	stability	and	single-pointedness	of
mind	and	the	other	emphasising	analysis	and	discrimination.	The	first	type	of
meditation	 is	 absorptive,	 and	 produces	 a	 quality	 of	 mental	 placement	 and
tranquillity,	 known	 as	
calm	 abiding
,	 and	 the	 latter,	 known	 as	
penetrative
insight
,	generates	a	deeper	insight	into	the	profound	natures	of	the	chosen
object.	 In	 the	 context	 of	 the	
tantras
,	 meditation	 additionally	 includes	 the
techniques	of	the	
generation
	and	
perfection	stages
,	as	well	as	those	of	the
Great	Perfection
.
	
Meditational	Deity
	
yi-dam
,	Skt.	
iṣṭadevatā
Forms	or	resonances	of	fully	manifest	
buddhahood
	whose	characteristics	are
defined	or	revealed	by	the	specific	tantric	practices	on	the	basis	of	which	they
are	 visualised.	 After	 receiving	
empowerment
	 and	 guidance	 concerning	 an
appropriate	 meditational	 deity	 or	
maṇḍala
	 of	 deities	 from	 an	 authoritative
spiritual	teacher
,	the	practitioner	
of	the	
tantras
	seeks	to	experientially	cultivate
union	with	the	qualities	of	
buddha-body
	
,	
speech
	and	
mind
	through	the	practice
of	the	
generation	stage
	of	meditation	related	to	a	specific	meditational	deity	or
maṇḍala
	of	deities.	It	is	essential	that	the	meditational	deities	should	not	be
perceived	as	externally	existing	or	independent	beings	but	rather	as	forms	or
resonances	of	
buddha-mind
	itself.	Union	with	the	meditational	deity	is	said	to
confer	supreme	
accomplishment
	on	the	meditator,	in	contrast	to	meditation	on
the	spiritual	teacher,	which	confers	
blessings
,	and	meditation	on	the	
ḍākin
ῑ
,

which	confers	enlightened	or	
buddha	activities
.
	
Meditative	Commitment
	
thugs-dam
This	refers	to	a	resolute	period	of	
meditative	equipoise
,	and	the	
commitments
pertaining	to	meditative	equipoise.	Note	that	the	same	term	is	also	used	as	the
honorific	equivalent	of	
yi-dam
	(meditational	deity).
	
Meditative	Concentration
	
bsam-gtan
,	Skt.	
dhyāna
Meditative	concentration	is	defined	as	the	one-pointed	abiding	in	an	undistracted
state	of	mind	free	from	the	taint	of	
dissonant	mental	states
	(
kleśa
).	It	is	an
advanced	 form	 of	
calm	 abiding
,	 where	 often	 both	
calm	 abiding
	 and
penetrative	 insight
	 may	 be	 present	 in	 perfect	 union.	 In	 the	
sūtras
	 and
abhidharma
	 literature	 of	 the	
Lesser	 Vehicle
,	 four	 states	 of	 meditative
concentration	are	identified	as	being	conducive	to	birth	in	the	seventeen	levels	of
the	
form	realm
.	These	are	characterised,	in	their	proper	order,	by	a	temporary
sojourn	from:	1)	physical	sensations	of	pain;	2)	mental	unhappiness;	3)	mental
excitements	related	to	pleasure;	and	4)	mundane	experiences	of	joy	as	a	whole.
In	the	context	of	the	
Greater	Vehicle
,	meditative	concentration	is	the	fifth	of	the
six	perfections
	(Skt.	
ṣaṭpāramitā
).
	
Meditative	Equipoise
	
mnyam-par	bzhag-pa
,	Skt.	
samāhita
Meditative	 equipoise	 refers	 to	 a	 one-pointed	 placement	 of	 the	 mind	 on	 a
meditation	 object	 or	 a	 theme,	 such	 as	 the	
selflessness
	 of	 the	 individual
personality	(Skt.	
pudgalanairātmya
	
)	and	the	
selflessness
	of	phenomena	(Skt.
dharmanairātmya
),	 which	 invariably	 occurs	 in	 the	 context	 of	 prolonged
meditative	 stability
(Skt.	
samādhi
).	 It	 is	 contrasted	 with	 periods	 of	 post-
meditation	(Skt.	
pṛṣtalabdha
,	Tib.	
rjes-thob
)	during	which	the	meditator	arises
from	meditative	equipoise,	and	engages	with	his	or	her	environment.
	
Meditative	Stability
	
ting-nge-’dzin
,	Skt.	
samādhi
The	Sanskrit	term	
samādhi
	literally	means	‘union’	or	‘combination’,	and	its
Tibetan	equivalent	
ting-nge-’dzin
	means	‘adhering	to	that	which	is	profound	and
definitive’.	 However,	 the	 term	 has	 several	 different	 meanings	 in	 different
contexts.	For	example,	in	
abhidharma
	texts	it	sometimes	refers	to	a	mental
factor	 that	 is	 part	 of	 a	 group	 of	 mental	 factors	 present	 in	 every	 veridical
cognition,	whereas	in	the	context	of	meditation,	it	can	be	synonymous	with
Meditative	 concentration
.	 In	 many	 instances,	
samādhi
	 refers	 to	 specific

meditative	 states	 such	 as	 diamond-like	 meditation,	 lion’s	 majestic	 pose
meditation	and	others	enumerated	in	the	
sūtras
	and	
tantras
	of	the	
Greater
Vehicle
.	 More	 specifically,	 in	 the	
Mahāyoga	 tantras
,	 the	 term	 meditative
stability	refers	to	the	three	phases	of	the	
generation
	and	
perfection	stages
	of
meditation.	These	are:	the	
leditative	stability	of	reality
	(
de-bzhin	nyid-kyi	ting-
nge-’dzin
),	the	
meditative	stability	which	illuminates	all	that	appears
	(
kun-tu
snang-ba’i	ting-nge-’dzin
),	and	the	
meditative	stability	of	the	causal	basis
(
rgyu’i	 ting-nge-’dzin
),	 which	 respectively	 and	 sequentially	 focus	 on	 great
emptiness
,	great	
compassion
	and	the	
seals
	of	the	
meditational	deities
.	In	the
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantras
,	 somewhat	 different	 terminology	 is	 used	 in	 the
contexts	of	the	
generation	stage
	and	the	
perfection	stage
.	In	the	generation
stage,	the	practice	of	the	
means	of	attainment
	takes	place	within	the	framework
of	(i)	the	initial	meditative	stability	(
dang-po	sbyor-ba’i	ting-nge-’dzin
),	(ii)	the
meditative	stability	of	the	victorious	rite	of	the	
maṇḍala
	(
dkyil-’khor	rgyal-chog-
gi	ting-nge-’dzin
),	and	(iii)	the	meditative	stability	of	the	victorious	rite	of
enlightened	activity	(
las	rgyal-chog-gi	ting-nge’dzin
	
).	In	the	context	of	the
perfection	stage
,	however,	these	same	terms	refer	to	an	advanced	level	of
realisation.
	
Mental	Body
	
yid-lus
,	Skt.	
manokāya
The	non-corporeal	body	assumed	during	the	
intermediate	state	of	rebirth
,
which	is	said	to	have	an	initial	similitude	to	the	physical	body	of	the	previous
life.	See	Chapter	11.
	
Mental	Factor
	
sems-byung
,	Skt.	
caitasika
	
See	
Mind
.
	
Merit
	
bsod-nams
,	 Skt.	
puṇya
	
Merit	 refers	 to	 the	 wholesome	 tendencies
imprinted	in	the	mind	as	a	result	of	positive	and	skilful	thoughts,	words,	and
actions	that	ripen	in	the	experience	of	happiness	and	well-being.	According	to
the	
Greater	Vehicle
,	it	is	important	to	dedicate	the	merit	of	one’s	wholesome
actions	to	the	benefit	of	all	
sentient	beings
,	ensuring	that	others	also	experience
the	results	of	the	positive	actions	generated.
	
Middle	Way
	
dbu-ma’i	lam
,	Skt.	
madhyamapratipad
See	
Madhyamaka
.
	

Mind
	
sems,
	Skt.	
citta
In	 Buddhism,	 mind	 is	 defined	 as	 a	 dynamic	 process,	 which	 is	 simply	 the
awareness	of	an	object	or	event.	In	its	technical	usage	mind	is	contrasted	with
fifty-one	
mental	factors
,	which	are	enumerated	in	the	
abhidharma
	literature.	In
the	context	of	this	differentiation	the	primary	function	of	‘mind’	is	to	be	aware	of
the	referent	object	as	a	whole,	whereas	the	modalities	which	relate	to	the	specific
aspects	 of	 the	 object	 are	 defined	 as	 ‘
mental	 factors
’.	 It	 is	 important	 to
understand	that	mind	in	Buddhism	should	not	be	conceived	of	as	a	static	thing	or
as	 something	 composed	 of	 a	 spiritual	 substance.	 Although	 some	 Buddhist
philosophical	schools	of	thought	do	identify	mind	as	the	essence	of	being	or
personal	identity,	the	notion	of	self	or	person	is	not	an	essential	component	of	the
Buddhist	concept	of	mind.	In	the	
Dzogchen
	teachings	an	important	distinction	is
made	between	the	Tibetan	terms	‘
sems
’	and	‘
rig-pa
’.	Here,	our	‘ordinary	mind’
(
sems
)	 is	 the	 gross	 dualising	
consciousness
	 (
rnam-shes
)	 whereas	 pure
awareness
	(
rig-pa
)	is	free	from	the	dualistic	perceptions	of	subject	and	object.
See	
Awareness
,	
Intrinsic	Awareness
,	and	
Consciousness
.
	
Mind	of	Enlightenment
	
byang-chub	sems
See	
Bodhicitta
.
	
Mindfuness
	
dran-pa
,	Skt.	
smṛti
	
Mindfulness	is	the	faculty	which	enables	the
mind
	 to	 maintain	 its	 attention	 on	 a	 referent	 object,	 thus	 allowing	 for	 the
development	of	familiarity	with	the	object	and	also	the	ability	to	retain	its
imprint	within	memory	for	future	recollection.	Together	with	mental	alertness,	it
is	one	of	the	two	indispensable	
mental	factors
	for	the	development	of	
calm
abiding
.	It	is	mindfulness	which	counteracts	the	arising	of	
forgetfulness,	and
forgetfulness	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 obstacles	 to	 a	 successful	 cultivation	 of
meditative	stability
.
	
Monastic	Community
	
dge-’dun
,	Skt.	
saṅgha
In	 its	 classical	 Buddhist	 usage,	 the	 term	 refers	 mainly	 to	 the	 spiritual
communities	 of	 ordained	 practitioners,	 both	 monks	 and	 nuns	 (Skt.	
bhikṣu/
bhikṣuṇ
ῑ
).	The	actual	
saṅgha
,	when	viewed	as	an	object	of	
refuge
	in	the	context
of	the	
Three	Precious	Jewels
,	is	a	highly	realised,	‘supreme	assembly’	of	those
who	have	gained	a	direct	insight	into	the	true	nature	of	
reality
	-	
emptiness
	(i.e.
those	who	have	attained	the	path	of	insight).
	

Monastic	Preceptor
	
mkhan-po
,	Skt.	
upādhyāya
The	term	monastic	preceptor	specifically	indicates	one	who	presides	over	the
monastic	 ordination	 ceremony	 of	 new	 monks.	 However,	 in	 some	 Tibetan
traditions,	the	word	‘
khenpo
’	(
mkhan-po
)	suggests	an	ordained	professor	of
Buddhist	philosophy,	in	which	case	it	is	equivalent	to	the	term	
geshe
	(
dge-shes
)
in	its	later	usage.	See	
Spiritual	Friend
.	The	same	term	can	also	be	used	to	refer
to	the	abbot	of	a	monastery,	in	which	case	it	often	takes	the	honorific	form
mkhan	rin-po-che
,	the	precious	abbot.
	
Monastic	Vows
	
sdom-pa
,	Skt.	
saṃvara
See	
Vows
.
	
Mother	and	Child	Aspeets	of	Reality
	
chos-nyid	ma-bu
The	‘mother’	and	‘child’	aspects	of	reality	are	those	associated	respectively	with
the	
inner	radiance
	of	the	ground	and	the	
inner	radiante
	of	the	path.	See	
Inner
Radiante
.
	
Motivational	Tendencies
	
’du-byas
,	Skt.	
saṃskāra
See	
Aggregate	of	Motivational	Tendencies
.
	
Mount	Gampodar
	
sgam-po-gdar-gyi	ri-bo
Mount	
Gampodar
	in	
Dakpo
	is	the	
treasure
-site	(
gter-kha
)	from	which	the	cycle
of	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	through	[Recognition
of]	 Enlightened	 Intention
	 (
Zhi-khro	 dgongs-pa	 rang-grol
)	 was	 unearthed	 as
treasure
	
(
gter-ma
)	by	
Karma	Lingpa
	during	the	fourteenth	century.	See	Gyurme
Dorje’s
‘Brief	Literary	History’.
	
Mount	Potālaka
	
ri-bo	po-ta-la-ka
Mount	
Potālaka
,	the	abode	of	
Avalokiteśvara
,	is	reputedly	identified	with	a
mountain	in	modern	Karnataka	State,	South	India,	according	to	the	classical
Indian	Buddhist	tradition.	However,	in	the	Chinese	Buddhist	tradition,	it	is
identified	with	the	eastern	island	of	
Putuo	Shan
	in	the	bay	of	
Hangzhou
.
	
Mount	Sumeru
	
ri-rab
Mount	
Sumeru
	is	the	
axis	mundi
	of	Indian	cosmology,	the	centre	of	the	world.	In

terms	of	the	Hindu,	Jain,	Buddhist	and	Bon	pilgrimage	traditions,	it	is	widely
identified	with	the	sacred	Mount	
Kailash
	in	far-west	Tibet.	See	
Four	Continents
and	Eight	Subcontinents
.
	
Nāgārjuna
	
klu-sgrub
A	 pre-eminent	 second-century	 AD	 Indian	 scholar	 and	 the	 founder	 of	 the
Madhyamaka
	
philosophical	school	of	Buddhist	thought.
	
Natural	Expression
	
rang-bzhin
,	Skt
.	svabhāva
While	the	term	
svabhāva
	conveys	other	meanings,	such	as	
self-identity
	and
inherent	existence
	in	the	contexts	of	
Madhyamaka
	philosophy	and	
sūtra
-based
literature	in	general,	here	in	the	specific	terminology	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	it	is
rendered	 as	 ‘natural	 expression’	 because	 it	 describes	 the	 dynamic	 of	 the
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
.	As	such,	it	is	contrasted	with	the	essence	-
the	dynamic	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	and	compassionate	energy	-	the
dynamic	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
.	The	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource
	is	said	to	be	endowed	with	seven	aspects	of	natural	expression:	1)
ripening	in	the	nature	of	
reality
,	2)	
buddha	attributes
	which	are	spontaneously
present,	3)	dimensionless	
pristine	congnition
,	4)	intrinsic	rather	than	external
manifestation,	5)	unqualified	sameness,	6)	freedom	from	single	and	multiple
concepts,	and	7)	inseparability	at	all	times.	In	the	context	of	the	present	work,
the	term	‘natural	expression’	also	refers	to	the	modalities	of	the	twenty-eight
wrathful	
Īśvar
ῑ
,	when	contrasted	with	the	‘
natural	purity
’	(
gnas-dag
)	of	the
peaceful	deities
	and	the	‘
natural	transformation
’	(
gnas-gyur
)	of	the	
wrathful
deities
.
	
Natural	Liberation
	
rang-grol
According	to	the	terminology	of	the	
Nyingma
	school	and	in	the	context	of	the
title	of	our	text	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural	Liberation	through
[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
	(
Zhi-khro	dgongs-pa	rang-grol
)	the	term
‘natural	liberation’	refers	to	a	natural	process	of	recognition	of	the	actual	nature
of	the	object,	which	is	free	from	any	form	of	renunciation	or	antidote.	
Dudjom
Rinpoche
	 explains	 the	 term	 ‘natural	 liberation’	 (
rang-grol
)	 to	 mean	 that
recognition	or	awareness	is	‘uncontrived	by	any	antidote,	and	all	that	arises	is
liberated	without	reference	to	other	liberating	activities’.	This	accomplishment	is
a	distinctive	feature	of	the	resultant	
vehicles
,	such	as	
Atiyoga
,	in	contrast	to	the
causal	
vehicles
,	in	which	the	application	of	antidotes	and	
renunciation
	are

required.
	
Natural	Pristine	Cognition
	
rang-byung	ye-shes
This	 term	 denotes	 the	 presence	 of	
intrinsic	 awareness	 which	 is	 pristone
cognition
	 as	 an	 uncultivated	 seed,	 said	 to	 abide	 atemporally	 in	 the	 mental
continua	 of	 all	 sentient	 beings.	 See	
Intrinsic	 Awareness
	 and	
Pristone
Cognition
.
	
Natural	Purity
	
gnas-su	dag-pa/rnam-par	dag-pa
According	to	the	terminology	of	the	
Nyingma
	school	and	in	the	context	of	the
present	work,	the	term	‘natural	purity’	refers	to	the	quiescent	naturally	abiding
purity	of	the	psycho-physical	
aggregates
,	
elemental	properties
,	and	sensory
and	mental	processes	as	represented	by	the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
	of	the
maṇḍala
.	‘Natural	purity’	indicates	the	presence	of	the	assembly	of	peaceful
deities	in	the	
continuum	of	the	ground
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Natural	Transformation
	
gnas	gyur-pa
In	contrast	to	the	term	‘
natural	purity
’,	the	term	‘natural	transformation’	refers
to	the	transformative	energies	of	the	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
	of	the	
maṇḍala
,
which	bring	about	the	active	transformation	of	the	conditioned	
psycho-physical
aggregates
	
,	
elemental	properties
,	and	sensory	and	mental	processes.	‘Natural
transformation’	indicates	the	presence	of	the	assembly	of	
wrathful	deities
	in	the
continuum	of	the	ground
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Naturally	Manifest
	
rang-snang
In	the	terminology	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	the	term	‘naturally	manifest’	or
‘intrinsically	manifest’	(
rang-snang
)	refers	to	the	non-dual	mode	in	which	the
natural	radiance	(
rang-gsal
)	of	
pristine	cognition
	(
ye-shes
)	arises	as	
intrinsic
awareness
	
(
rang-rig
).	See	
Intrinsic	Awareness
.	An	important	distinction	is	also
made	 between	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect	 Resource
,	 which	 manifests
naturally	or	intrinsically,	and	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
,	which	manifests
extraneously	(
gzhan-snang
),	for	the	sake	of	sentient	beings.
	
Negativity
	
sdig-pa
,	Skt.	
pāpa
The	negativity	arising	from	the	performance	of	
non-virtuous	 past	 actions
,
which,	along	with	negative	
obscurations
	(
sgrib
)	and	their	
habitual	tendencies

(
bag-chag
),	 all	 have	 their	 basis	 in	
delusion
,	
attachment
,	 and	
aversion
.
Negativity,	therefore,	generates	a	momentum	towards	a	less	favourable	rebirth
within	
cyclic	existence
.	
New	and	Old/Ancient	Translation	Schools
	
gsar-ma-
dang	rnying-ma
	
See	
Nyingma
.
	
Nihilist
	
chad-lta-ba/mur-stug-pa
,	Skt.	
naiṣṭhika
Nihilism	and	
eternalism
	are	the	two	extreme	views	which	must,	according	to
Buddhist	thought,	be	transcended	in	order	for	any	philosophical	position	to	be
considered	well-founded.	Nihilism	in	general	refers	to	the	view	that	denies	the
existence	of	objects,	laws	of	
cause	and	effect
	and	the	principle	of	
dependent
origination
	
.	However,	based	on	one’s	metaphysical	position	with	regard	to	the
nature	of	
reality
,	the	criteria	of	what	constitutes	a	denial	of	the	existence	of
phenomena	or	the	law	of	
cause	and	effect
	may	differ.	In	ancient	India	the
nihilist	view	was	characteristic	of	the	
Carvāka
	and	
Bārhaspatya
	 materialist
schools.	See	
Eternalist
	
and	
Madhyamaka
.
	
Nine	Sequences	of	the	Vehicle
	
theg-pa’i	rim-pa	dgu
See	under	
Nine	Vehicles
.
	
Nine	Vehicles
	
theg-pa	dgu
,	Skt.	
navayāna
In	the	
Nyingma
	school,	the	Buddhist	teachings	are	systematised	according	to	a
hierarchy	of	the	three	outer	or	causal	
vehicles
	(those	of	the	
pious	attendants
,
hermit	buddhas
	and	
bodhisattvas
),	those	of	the	three	outer	classes	of	
tantra
(
Kriyātantra
,	
Ubhayatantra
	 and	
Yogatantra
),	 and	 those	 of	 the	 three	 inner
classes	of	
tantra
	
(
Mahāyoga
,	
Anuyoga
	and	
Atiyoga
).	See	the	nine	individual
entries.
	
Nirvāna
	
myang-’das
Nirvāṇa
	(lit.	‘state	beyond	sorrow’)	refers	to	the	permanent	cessation	of	all
suffering
	
and	the	
dissonant	mental	states
	which	cause	and	perpetuate	suffering,
along	with	all	misapprehension	with	regard	to	the	nature	of	
emptiness
	(Skt
.
śūnyatā
).	
Nirvāṇa
	
is	therefore	the	antithesis	of	
cyclic	existence
	(Skt.	
saṃsāra
).
Since	it	is	through	the	misapprehension	of	the	nature	of	
actual	reality
	(Skt
.
dharmatā
)	that	our	conscious	states	of	delusion	arise,	a	total	elimination	of	these
dissonant	mental	states
	can	only	be	effected	by	generating	a	genuine	insight
into	the	true	nature	of	
actual	reality
.	All	the	
bodhisattva
	
paths
	expounded	in	the
sūtras
	and	all	the	aspects	of	the	
continuum	of	the	path
	which	are	expounded	in

the	
tantras
	are	regarded	as	the	means	by	which	
nirvāṇa
	might	be	attained.
Classical	Buddhist	literature	mentions	three	types	of	
nirvāṇa
:	1)	
nirvāṇa
	with
residue,	
i.e.
	the	initial	state	of	
nirvāṇa
	when	the	person	is	still	dependent	on	his
or	her	karmically	conditioned	psycho-physical	
aggregates
	
(
skandha
);	2)	
nirvāṇa
without	residue,	
i.e.
	an	advanced	state	of	
nirvāṇa
	where	the	former	aggregates
have	also	been	consumed	within	emptiness;	and	3)	non-abiding	
nirvāṇa
,	
i.e.
	a
state	that	has	transcended	both	the	extremes	of	conditioned	cyclic	
existence
	and
also	the	isolated	peace	or	quiescence	of	
nirvāṇa
.
	
Non-virtuous	Action
	
mi-dge-ba
,	Skt.	
akuśala
See	
Virtuous	Action
.
	
Nucleus	of	the	Sugata/Tathāgata
	
bde-gshegs	snying-po	/	de-gshegs	snying-po
,
Skt.	
sugatagarbha/tathāgatagarbha
Both	
Sugata
	(One	Who	Has	Gone	to	Bliss)	and	
Tathāgata
	(One	Who	Has	Thus
Gone)	are	epithets	of	
Buddha
.	However,	the	expression	‘nucleus	of	the	
sugata
’
or	‘nucleus	of	the	
tathāgata
’	refers	to	the	seed	of	
buddha	nature
	present	but
uncultivated	in	the	mental	continuum	of	all	sentient	beings,	and	without	which
the	attainment	of	
enlightenment
	or	
buddhahood
	would	be	impossible.	See
Buddha	nature
.
	
Nyinda	Choje
	
nyin-zla	chos-rje
The	name	of	the	son	of	
Karma	Lingpa
.	See	Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary
History’.
	
Nyinda	Ozer
	
nyin-zla	‘od-zer
The	name	of	a	second-generation	lineage-holder	of	
Karma	Lingpa
.	See	Gyurme
Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary	History’.
	
Nyingma
	
rnying-ma
The	oldest	school	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	based	on	the	teaching	traditions	and
texts	introduced	to	Tibet	during	the	earliest	phase	of	Buddhist	propagation,
which	coincided	with	the	reigns	of	the	Buddhist	kings	of	the	
Yarlung
	dynasty	in
the	eighth	to	ninth	centuries.	These	traditions	were	introduced	from	India	by
Padmasambhava
	
,	
Vimalamitra
	and	others,	and	maintained	in	Tibet	by	the
twenty-five	disciples	of	
Padmasambhava
.	The	distinction	between	the	old	and

new	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism	is	made	on	the	basis	of	the	interregnum	which
followed	the	persecution	of	Buddhism	during	the	ninth	century	and	preceded	the
second	or	later	phase	of	Buddhist	propagation	when	a	further	corpus	of	Buddhist
literature	was	introduced	from	India	by	
Marpa
,	
Drokmi	Lotsāwa
,	
Atiśa
,	
Rinchen
Zangpo
	and	others	during	the	eleventh	century.	Lineages	derived	from	the	earlier
phase	and	works	translated	before	the	interregnum	are	known	as	
Nyingma
,	or	the
‘Ancient	Translation	school’,	in	contrast	to	those	which	emerged	thereafter	and
are	known	as	
Sarma
,	or	the	‘New	Translation	schools’.
	
Nyingthig
	
snying-thig
The	teachings	known	as	the	‘Innermost	Spirituality’	or	‘Heart-Essence’	(
snying-
thig
)	are	the	most	important	and	essential	pith	instructions	within	the	esoteric
instructional	 class	 (
upadeśavarga
)	 of	
Atiyoga
,	 including	 the	 techniques	 of
Cutting	 through	 Resistance
	 and	
All-surpassing	 Realisation
.	 Two	 distinct
lineages	of	these	teachings	were	introduced	from	India	by	
Padmasambhava
	and
Vimalamitra
,	and	then	transmitted	with	great	secrecy	in	Tibet	until	the	time	of
Longchen	Rabjampa
	(fourteenth	century),	who	integrated	them	in	his	
Four-
part	Innermost	Spirituality
	(
sNying-thig	ya-bzhi
),	from	which	time	they	were
widely	disseminated	and	practised.	Diverse	traditions	of	
Nyingthig
	are	practised
within	 the	
treasure
	 (
gter-ma
)	 traditions	 of	 the	
Nyingma
	 school,	 the	 most
influential	in	more	recent	times	being	the	
Innermost	Spirituality	of	Longchenpa
(
Klong-chen	snying-thig
),	which	was	revealed	during	the	eighteenth	century	by
Rigdzin	Jigme	Lingpa
	on	the	basis	of	his	inspirational	
visions	of	
Longchen
Rabjampa
,	and	which	has	since	become	the	most	popular	recension	of	
Nyingthig
teachings	throughout	Tibet.
	
Oath-bound	Protectors
	
dam-can
A	class	of	
protectors
	of	the	
sacred	teachings
	who	are	considered	to	have	been
originally	 indigenous	 Tibetan	 spirits,	 bound	 under	 an	 oath	 of	 allegiance	 to
Buddhism	by	
Padmasambhava
	during	the	eighth	century.
	
Obscuration
	
sgrib-pa
,	 Skt.	
āvaraṇa
	
There	 are	 two	 main	 categories	 of
obscurations	(
sgrib-pa
),	namely:	the	
dissonant	mental	states
	(
nyon-sgrib
,	Skt
.
kleśāvaraṇa
)	 which	 are	 the	 obscurations	 to	
liberation
,	 and	 the	 subtle
propensities	of	these	mental	states	as	well	as	that	of	
fundamental	ignorance
,
which	constitute	the	obscurations	to	
omniscience
	(
shes-sgrib
,	Skt.	
jñeyāvaraṇa
).	As	the	terms	themselves	indicate,	the	first	category	of	obscurations	obstruct

the	individual	from	gaining	total	freedom	from	
karmically
	conditioned	
cyclic
existence
	
,	and	the	latter	from	attaining	a	direct	and	non-deceptive	realisation	of
all	 aspects	 of	
reality
.	 The	 obscurations	 to	
liberation
	 include	 not	 only	 the
conscious	states	of	our	
deluded	mind
,	such	as	desire,	hatred,	jealousy,	harmful
intent,	etc.,	but	also	the	psychological	
habitual	tendencies
	which	are	imprinted
by	these	states,	which	serve	as	seeds	for	their	continuity	and	recurrence.	The
second	 category	 of	 obscurations	 refers	 to	 the	 ‘propensities	 for	 bewildering
dualistic	appearance’	(
gnyis-snang	khrul-pa’i	bag-chags
),	the	subtle	dispositions
and	latent	tendencies	which	are	deeply	ingrained	within	an	individual’s	psyche
and	which	are	the	origins	of	our	
dualistic
	perceptions	of	the	phenomenal	world
and	of	our	own	consciousness.	A	total	overcoming	of	both	obscurations	(Tib.
sgrib-gnyis
)	marks	the	attainment	of	
buddhahood
.
	
Obstacle-causing	Spirits
	
bar-cad-kyi	gdon
The	various	classes	of	spirits	(
gdon
)	who	cause	obstacles	to	individuals	and
pollute	the	environment,	which	are	said	to	impede	certain	localities,	the	physical
body	and	human	activities.	In	particular,	there	is	an	enumeration	of	eighteen
such	spirits	to	whom	paediatric	diseases	are	attributed	by	the	Tibetan	medical
tradition.
	
Obstruting	Forces
	
bgegs
,	Skt.	
vighna
A	class	of	forces	which	obstruct	spiritual	practice,	but	whose	obstacles	may	be
considered	psychologically	as	cathartic	in	that	their	emergence	may	suggest	that
one’s	own	negative	
past	actions
	are	ripening	and	therefore	their	negative	impact
is	finally	maturing	and	coming	to	an	end.	Often	when	
means	for	attainment
	are
performed	in	accordance	with	the	
tantras
,	a	
torma
-offering
	is	dedicated	to	such
obstructing	 forces	 prior	 to	 the	 commencement	 of	 the	
generation	 stage
	 of
meditation.
	
Oḍḍiyāna
	
o-rgyan
Oḍḍiyāna
,	 the	 birthplace	 of	
Padmasambhava
,	 is	 the	 name	 of	 an	 ancient
kingdom,	probably	situated	in	the	remote	north-west	of	the	Indian	subcontinent,
where	a	large	corpus	of	tantric	literature	is	said	to	have	been	propagated	in	the
human	world	for	the	first	time.	The	land	of	
Oḍḍiyāna
	is	associated	with	a
number	of	great	
accomplished	masters
	(
siddha
),	including	
Padmasambhava
,
Kambalapāda
,	and	
L
ῑ
lāvajra
	in	particular.	On	the	basis	of	traditional	Tibetan
pilgrimage	accounts,	such	as	that	written	by	
Orgyenpa	Rinchenpel
,	 modern

writers	identify	
Oḍḍiyāna
	
as	having	been	in	the	region	of	the	
Swat
	valley	in
Pakistan.	The	Tibetan	form	of	
Oḍḍiyāna
,	
Orgyen
,	is	also	by	extension	a	name
for	
Padmasambhava
	himself.
	
Offering
	
mchod-pa
,	Skt.	
pūjā
In	a	Buddhist	context,	this	refers	to	offerings	made	to	the	
meditational	deity
,
the	
spiritual	teacher
	or	other	appropriate	objects	of	veneration.	In	general,	there
are	offerings	associated	with	body,	speech	and	mind.	Thus,	an	offering	can	be	of
material	substance	such	as	flowers,	scented	water	and	food,	or	a	verbal	offering,
such	as	the	recitation	of	songs	of	praise,	or	a	mental	offering,	such	as	the
offering	of	the	positive	potentials	which	one	may	have	accumulated	as	a	result	of
having	engaged	in	wholesome	deeds	beneficial	to	others.	More	specifically,	the
tantras
	
identify	four	kinds	of	offering	which	are	to	be	made,	namely,	outer,
inner,	secret	and	definitive	offerings.	The	outer	offerings	of	enjoyment	(
phyi
nyer-spyod-kyi	 mchod-pa
)	 are	 the	 eight	 associated	 with	 the	 eight	 offering
goddesses,	including	water	for	the	mouth,	water	for	the	feet,	flowers,	incense,
light,	perfume,	food,	and	sound,	as	well	as	song,	dance,	and	meditation.	Inner
offerings	 of	 commitment	 (
nang	 dam-rdzas-kyi	 mchod-pa
)	 refer	 to	 the	 pure
essences	of	semen,	blood	and	flesh,	transformed	through	the	
yoga
	of	the	
energy
channels
,	currents	and	
seminal	points
	
within	the	
subtile	body
.	Secret	offerings
are	those	of	sexual	union	and	‘liberation’	(
gsang-ba	sbyor-sgrol-gyi	mchod-pa
)
related	to	the	esoteric	rites	and	practices	which	transform	the	
five	poisons
	into
the	five	
pristine	cognitions
,	and	definitive	offerings	are	those	of	great	sameness
(
de-kho-na-nyid	mnyam-pa	chen-po’i	mchod-pa
),	namely	the	union	of	bliss	and
emptiness
.
	
Omniscience
	
thams-cad	mkhyen-pa-nyid
,	Skt.	
sarvajñatā
In	a	Buddhist	context	the	word	is	reserved	only	for	the	all-knowing	
pristine
cognition
	
of	the	
buddhas
.	Although	the	original	Sanskrit	and	Tibetan	terms,	like
their	 English	 equivalent,	 do	 carry	 with	 them	 the	 literal	 connotation	 of	 all-
knowingness,	the	principal	meaning	of	the	term	should	be	understood	in	terms	of
a	direct	and	simultaneous	perception	of	the	dual	aspects	of	
reality
,	
i.e.
	of	the
phenomenal	aspects	(valid	only	within	the	relative	framework	of	our	ordinary
perceptions)	and	their	ultimate	nature,	
emptiness
.	In	other	words	the	term	refers
primarily	to	a	non-conceptual	simultaneous	perception	of	the	
two	truths
	within
a	single	mental	act.
	

One-day	Vows
	
bsnyen-gnas-kyi	sdom-pa
,	Skt.	
upavāsasaṃvara
See	
Prātimokṣa
	and	
Vows
.
	
Pacification
	
zhi-ba’i	las
,	Skt.	
śāntikriyā
See	under	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlihtened	Activity
.
	
Padma	Family
	
padma’i	rigs
,	Skt.	
padmakula
One	of	the	
five	enlihtened	families
	(
pañcakula
)	into	which	the	
meditational
deities
	
of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	are	subdivided.	The	deities	of
the	
Padma
	
family	include	the	peaceful	
buddhas
	
Amitābha
	and	
Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
,
and	the	corresponding	wrathful	aspects	
Padma	Heruka
	and	
Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ
.
See	Appendix	Two.
	
Padmākara
	
padma’i	’byung-gnas
See	
Padmasambhava
.
	
Padmasambhava
,	
padma	sam-bha-va
Padmasambhava
,	also	generally	known	as	
Guru	Rinpoche
	and	
Padmākara
,	is
revered	as	the	master	from	
Oddiyāna
	who,	along	with	
Sāntarakṣita
	and	King
Trisong	 Detsen
,	 formally	 established	 Buddhism	 in	 Tibet	 during	 the	 eighth
century.	In	particular,	he	is	renowned	for	his	suppression	and	conversion	of
malevolent	
spirits	and	hostile	non-Buddhist	forces,	as	well	as	for	introducing	to
Tibet	many	oral	transmissions	and	texts	of	
Mahāyoga
	and	
Atiyoga
,	including	the
teachings	contained	in	our	text,	the	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities:	Natural
Liberation	through	[Recognition	of]	Enlightened	Intention
	(
Zhi-khro	dgongs-pa
rang-grol
).	To	practitioners	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	and	all	those	who	follow	the
practices	of	the	
Nyingma
	
lineages
,	he	is	revered	as	a	‘second	
buddha
’,	and
there	are	many	systems	of	meditation	based	on	the	visualisation	of	his	rainbow-
like	form.	Tibetan	literature	contains	a	number	of	biographical	accounts,	which
describe	his	life	in	the	form	of	eight	or	twelve	different	manifestations.	See
Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary	History’.
	
Palace
	
pho-brang/gzhal-yas-khang
,	Skt.	
vimāna
See	under	
Maṇḍala
.
	
Paradise
	
zhings-khams
,	Skt.	
buddhakṣetra

See	
Buddha	Field
.
	
Past	Actions
	
las
,	Skt.	
karma
The	technical	term	‘
karma
’	refers	to	the	dynamic	relationship	between	actions
and	their	consequences.	It	includes	in	its	causal	aspect	both	the	actual	actions
(physical,	verbal	and	mental)	and	the	psychological	imprints	and	tendencies
created	within	the	mind	by	such	actions.	After	the	performance	of	an	action	a
causal	chain	is	maintained	within	the	mental	continuum	which	continues	through
the	present	and	successive	rebirths.	Such	a	karmic	potential	is	activated	when	it
interacts	with	appropriate	circumstances	and	conditions,	thus	leading	to	the
fruition	of	its	effects.	This	dynamic	of	past	actions	has	two	main	features:	1)	one
never	experiences	the	consequences	of	an	action	not	committed;	and	2)	the
potential	of	an	action	once	committed	is	never	lost	unless	obviated	by	specific
remedies.	It	is	also	worth	bearing	in	mind	that	the	idea	of	‘past	actions’	in
Buddhism	cannot	be	equated	with	the	notion	of	causality	as	understood	in	a
strictly	deterministic	sense.
	
Path
	
lam
,	Skt.	
mārga
The	means	of	spiritual	practice	(view,	meditation,	conduct	and	so	forth)	by
which	the	resultant	goal	of	any	of	the	
nine	vehicles
	might	be	attained.
	
Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities
	
zhi-khro
See	Appendix	Two.
	
Penetrative	Insight
	
lhag-mthong
,	Skt.	
vipaśyanā
This	is	an	analytical	meditative	state,	penetrating	the	nature,	characteristics	or
function	of	the	chosen	object	of	
meditation
,	which	is	accompanied	by	physical
and	mental	suppleness	and	generated	on	the	basis	of	mental	tranquillity	or	
calm
abiding
.	The	object	of	such	an	insight	can	be	mundane,	such	as	the	topics	of
impermanence
	
and	
suffering
,	 or	 supramundane,	 such	 as	
emptiness
,	 the
ultimate	nature	of	
reality
.	This	‘penetrative	insight’	can	be	attained	only	in	union
with	
calm	abiding
,	and	many	
meditation
	manuals	state	that	the	
realisation
	of
‘calm	
abiding
’	is	an	essential	prerequisite	for	the	cultivation	of	‘penetrative
insight’.	However,	in	
Unsurpassed
	
Yogatantra
	there	exist	advanced	techniques
which	enable	practitioners	to	attain	‘
calm	abiding
’	and	‘penetrative	insight’
simultaneously.

	
Perception
	
’du-shes
,	Skt.	
saṃjñā
See	under	
Aggregate	of	Perceptions
.
	
Perfection	of	Discriminative	Awareness
	
sher-phyin
,	Skt.	
prajñāpāramitā
Often	 translated	 also	 as	 ‘perfection	 of	 wisdom’,	 the	 Sanskrit	 word
prajñāpāramitā
	
refers	to	the	sixth	of	the	
six	perfections
	(Skt.	
s
aṭpāramitā
)
which	are	cultivated	by	
bodhisattvas
.	The	term	‘perfection	of	discriminative
awareness’	has	three	different	applications:	firstly,	it	may	refer	to	the	resultant,
perfected	discriminative	awareness	(’
bras-bu	sher-phyin
)	of	a	
buddha
,	which	is
totally	non-dual,	free	of	all	
obscurations
,	and	perceives	spontaneously	in	a
single	mental	act	the	dual	aspects	of	all	phenomena.	See	
Two	Truths
.	Secondly,
it	may	refer	to	the	
bodhisattva	paths
	which	lead	to	the	above	perfection	of
discriminative	 awareness	 (
lam	 sher-phyin
),	 blending	 together	 at	 the	 most
profound	level	the	discriminative	awareness	of	
emptiness
	(
śūnyatā
)	and	the
skiful	means
	of	great	
compassion
	(
mahākaruṇā
).	Thirdly,	it	may	denote	the
literature	 of	 the	
Prajñāpāramitā
	 subdivision	 of	 the	
sūtras
	 of	 the	
Greater
Vehicle
,	which	outline	the	essential	aspects	of	those	paths	and	results	(
gzhung
sher-phyin
).	 Iconographically,	
Prajñāpāramitā
	 is	 depicted	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a
female	
meditational	deity
	and	the	Sanskrit	
sūtras
	themselves	are	invariably
entitled	
Transcendent	Lady	who	is	the	Perfection	of	Discriminative	Awareness
(
Bhagavat
ῑ
prajñāpāramitā
).	See	also	under	
Discriminative	Awareness
.
	
Perfection	Stage
	
rdzogs-rim
,	Skt.	
sampannakrama
Following	the	meditative	generation	of	the	form	of	the	
meditational	deity
	and
an	approximation	of	the	
pristine	cognition
	of	the	
meditational	deity
	during	the
generation	stage
	(Skt.	
utpattikrama
),	the	perfection	stage	employs	techniques
for	controlling	the	
energy	channels
,	
vital	energies
	and	
seminal	points
	within
the	practitioner’s	transmuted	body.	The	purpose	is	to	make	manifest	the	
inner
radiance
	 induced	 by	 the	 ever-deepening	 realisation	 of	 the	 four	 kinds	 of
emptiness
	or	‘dissolution	stages’	and	of	the	
coemergent	pristine	cognition
induced	 by	 the	
four	 delights
.	 The	 factor	 that	 marks	 the	 transition	 from
generation	stage
	to	perfection	stage	is	the	
yogin
’s	ability	to	draw	the	
vital
energies
	(Skt.	
vāyu
)	into	the	
central	channel
.	See	also	
Great	Perfection
.
	
Perfections
	
pha-rol-du	phyin-pa
See	under	
Six	Perfections
.

	
Pious	Attendant
	
nyan-thos
,	Skt.	
śrāvaka
The	practitioners	of	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
	(
h
ῑ
nayāna
)	include	both	pious	attendants
and	
hermit	buddhas
	(Skt.	
pratyekabuddha
).	The	primary	differences	between
them	 are	 the	 focus	 and	 modalities	 of	 their	 practice	 on	 the	 path	 towards
liberation
	from	
cyclic	existence
.	The	pious	attendant	places	greater	emphasis	on
destroying	the	mistaken	belief	in	personal	identity	(
pudgala
)	by	overcoming	the
primary	and	secondary	
dissonant	mental	states
,	while	the	
hermit	 buddha
additionally	comes	to	realise	that	objective	phenomena	are	devoid	of	
inherent
existence
.	Characteristically,	the	pious	attendants	depend	on	oral	instructions
when	both	receiving	teachings	and	when	giving	guidance	to	others	on	the	path.
See	
Hermit	Buddha
.
	
Posture	of	the	Bodhisattvas
	
sems-dpa’i	skyil-krung
,	Skt.	
sattvaparyaṅka
Also	known	as	the	posture	of	royal	ease	(
mahārājal
ῑ
lāsana
),	this	is	the	posture
in	 which	 seated	 male	 and	 female	
bodhisattvas
	 are	 commonly	 depicted
iconographically	or	visualised	in	meditation	in	which	the	right	leg	is	extended
and	the	left	leg	drawn	in.	The	extended	right	leg	and	foot	symbolises	the
abandonment	of	all	negative	defects,	and	the	drawn	in	left	leg	symbolises	the
deity’s	understanding	and	cultivation	of	all	positive	attributes.	As	the	combined
purity	 of	 the	 deity’s	
compassionate	
skilful	means
	 (extended	 right	 leg)	 and
discriminative	awareness
	
(drawn	in	left	leg),	this	posture	also	represents	the
abandonment	of	the	two	extremes	of	
cyclic	existence
	and	
nirvāṇa
.
	
Posture	of	the	Lion
	
seng-ge’i	’dug-stangs
,	Skt.	
siṃhāsana
The	posture	of	the	lion	is	the	posture	assumed	by	
Sākyamuni	Buddha
	at	the
time	of	his	passing,	lying	on	the	right	side	with	his	right	arm	bent	at	the	elbow
and	his	palm	supporting	the	head.
	
Posture	of	Royal	Ease
	
rgyal-chen	rol-pa’i	skyil-krung
,	Skt.	
mahārājal
ῑ
lāsana
See	under	
Posture	of	the	Bodhisattvas
.
	
Power
	
stobs
,	Skt.	
bala
In	general,	spiritual	power	is	classified,	along	with	
discriminative	awareness
and	
compassion
,	as	one	of	the	three	principal	attributes	to	be	cultivated	by
bodhisattvas
,	symbolised	in	this	case	by	the	form	of	the	
Bodhisattva	Vajrapāṇi
.

More	specifically,	
bodhisattvas
	cultivate	ten	spiritual	powers	(
daśabala
)	with
respect	 to	 their	 reflections,	 higher	 aspirations,	 practice,	
discriminative
awareness
,	 aspirational	 prayers,	 diverse	
vehicles
,	 modes	 of	 conduct,
emanational	 abilities,	
enlightenment
,	 and	 teaching	 of	 the	 sacred	 doctrine.
Distinct	 from	 these	 are	 the	 so-called	 ten	 powers	 of	 the	
buddhas
(
daśatathāgatabala
),	which	are	all	included	among	the	categories	of	
buddha
attributes
.	
Buddhas
	are	said	to	be	endowed	with	spiritual	power	because	they
have:	(i)	the	power	of	knowing	the	positive	and	negative	contingencies	of	all
things,	(ii)	the	power	of	knowing	the	maturation	of	
past	actions
,	(iii)	the	power
of	 knowing	 diverse	 volitions,	 (iv)	 the	 power	 of	 knowing	 diverse	
sensory
spectra
,	(v)	the	power	of	knowing	those	who	are	of	supreme	ability	and	those
who	are	not,	(vi)	the	power	of	knowing	all	spiritual	paths	—	wherever	they	lead,
(vii)	 the	 power	 of	
omniscience
	 with	 respect	 to	
meditative	 concentration
,
liberation
,	
meditative	 stability,	 meditative	 equipoise
,	 and	 purification	 of
dissonant	mental	states
,	(viii)	the	power	of	recollecting	past	abodes,	(ix)	the
power	of	knowing	where	consciousness	is	transferred	at	the	time	of	death	and
rebirth,	and	(x)	the	power	of	knowing	that	the	entire	flow	of	corrupt	
past	actions
has	ceased.
	
Prahevajra
	
dga’-rab	rdo-rje
More	 commonly	 known	 in	 the	 Tibetan	 form	
Garab	 Dorje
,	
Prahevajra
	 is
regarded	as	the	first	human	
lineage	holder
	of	
Atiyoga
.
	
Prāsaṅgika
	
thal-’gyur-ba
See	
Madhyamaka
.
	
Prātimoṣa
	
so-sor	thar-pa
	
An	individual’s	practice	of	ethical	discipline	which
acts	as	a	firm	foundation	for	the	aspirant’s	spiritual	endeavour	whilst	on	the	path
towards	the	attainment	of	
liberation
	
from	
cyclic	existence
.	There	are	eight	types
of	
prātimokṣa
	vows:	1)	
one-day	vows
	(Skt.	
upavāsa/upavās
ῑ
),	a	lay	person’s
vow	of	abstinence,	taken	only	for	a	twenty-four	hour	period,	from	killing,	sexual
misconduct,	stealing,	lying,	alcohol,	frivolous	activities,	eating	after	lunch,	and
using	high	seats	or	beds;	2-3)	the	five	vows	of	a	lay	man	and	a	lay	woman	(Skt.
upāsaka/	upāsikā
)	which	are	not	to	kill,	lie,	steal,	be	intoxicated,	or	commit
sexual	misconduct;	4	—	5)	the	vows	of	the	novice	monk	and	novice	nun	(Skt.
śrāmaṇera/	śrāmaṇerikā
);	6)	the	vows	of	a	probationary	nun	(Skt.	
śiksamāṇa
);
7)	the	253	vows	of	a	fully	ordained	monk	(Skt.	
bhikṣu
);	and	8)	the	364	vows

maintained	by	fully	ordained	nuns	(Skt.	
bhiksuṇ
ῑ
).	
Prātimokṣa
	
literally	means
‘individual	
liberation
’,	or	the	initial	stage	of	release	from	the	impulsive	force	of
non-virtuous
	 habits.	 ‘
Prāti
’	 means	 ‘individually’	 or	 ‘first’,	 and	 ‘
mokṣa
’,
‘release’,	‘freedom’,	or	‘
liberation
’.	See	also	under	
Vows
.
	
Preceptor
	
mkhan-po
,	Skt.	
upādhyāya
See	
Monastic	Preceptor
.
	
Precious	Jewels
	
dkon-mchog
,	Skt.	
ratna
See	under	
Three	Precious	Jewels
.
	
Preliminary	Practices
	
sngon-’gro
The	preliminary	practices	are	those	undertaken	by	an	aspiring	practitioner	of	the
tantras
,	prior	to	engaging	in	the	main	practices	of	the	
generation
	and	
perfection
stages
	of	meditation.	There	are	both	outer,	or	common,	preliminaries,	and	inner,
or	uncommon,	preliminaries.	The	former	are	the	four	analytical	meditations
which	turn	the	mind	of	the	practitioner	away	from	worldly	distractions	and
towards	the	
sacred	teachings
,	namely	those	focusing:	on	the	nature	of	the
precious	opportunities	afforded	by	human	birth;	on	death	and	
impermanence
(
anitya
);	on	the	dynamics	of	
past	actions
	(
karma
)	and	their	consequences;	and
on	the	
sufferings
	of	beings	within	
cyclic	existence
	(
saṃsāra
).	The	latter	are	the
five	purificatory	practices,	each	of	which	is	performed	one	hundred	thousand
times,	 namely:	 the	 taking	 of	
refuge
	 in	 the	
Three	 Precious	 Jewels
,	 in
conjunction	with	the	act	of	
prostration
	(which	purifies	pride);	the	cultivation	of
the	 altruistic	 intention	 to	 attain	 enlightenment	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 others,	 in
conjunction	with	the	recitation	of	the	appropriate	verses	(which	purifies	envy
and	 mundane	 ambition);	 the	 recitation	 of	
Vajrasattva
’s	
Hundred-syllable
Mantra
	(which	purifies	
aversion
);	the	
offering
	of	the	
maṇḍala
	(which	purifies
attachment
);	and	the	cultivation	of	union	with	the	enlightened	attributes	of	the
spiritual	 teacher
	 (
guruyoga
),	 in	 conjunction	 with	 the	 appropriate	
mantra
recitation	(which	purifies	
delusion
).	See	Chapters	1	and	2.
	
Primordial	Purity
	
ka-dag
See	
Spontaneous	Presence
.
	
Pristine	Cognition
	
ye-shes
,	Skt.	
jñāna

The	 modality	 of	
buddha-mind
.	 Although	 all	
sentient	 beings
	 possess	 the
potential	for	actualising	pristine	cognition	within	their	mental	continuum,	the
psychological	confusions	and	deluded	tendencies	which	defile	the	
mind
	obstruct
the	natural	expression	of	these	inherent	potentials,	making	them	appear	instead
as	aspects	of	mundane	
consciousness
	(
vijñāna
).	Buddhist	literature	mentions
five	types	of	pristine	cognition	which	are	the	quintessential	perfected	states	of
our	own	mental	faculties	and	which	are	identified	with	the	five	male	
buddhas
	of
the	
maṇḍala
	 of	
Peaceful	 and	 Wrathful	 Deities
.	 See	 Appendix	 Two.	 The
pristine	cognition	of	
reality’s	expanse
	
(
dharmadhātujñāna
)	is	the	natural	purity
of	the	
aggregate	of	consciousness
,	free	from	
delusion
;	the	mirror-like	pristine
cognition	(
ādarśajñāna
)	is	the	mind	to	which	all	the	objects	of	the	five	senses
appear	spontaneously	as	in	a	mirror,	it	is	the	natural	purity	of	the	
aggregate	of
form
,	free	from	
aversion
;	the	pristine	cognition	of	sameness	(
samatājñāna
)	is
the	mind	that	experiences	the	three	different	types	of	feelings	(good,	bad	and
indifferent)	as	of	one	taste,	it	is	the	natural	purity	of	the	
aggregate	of	feeling
,
free	from	pride;	the	pristine	cognition	of	discernment	(
pratyavekṣaṇajñāna
)	is
the	mind	that	accurately	identifies	names	and	forms,	it	is	the	natural	purity	of	the
aggregate	of	perceptions
,	free	from	
attachment
;	and	the	
pristine	cognition	of
accomplishment	(
kṛtyupasthānajñāna
)	is	the	mind	that	accords	with	awakened
activities	 and	 their	 purposes,	 it	 is	 the	 natural	 purity	 of	 the	
aggregate	 of
motivational	tendencies
,	free	from	envy	and	self-centred	ambition.
	
Propensities
	
bag-chags
,	Skt.	
vāsanā
See	
Habitual	Tendencies
.
	
Prostration
	
phyag-’tshal-ba
A	common	gesture	of	reverence	in	the	practice	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.	During	the
preliminary	practices
	(
sngon-’gro
)	of	the	
tantras
,	the	act	of	paying	homage
through	prostration	is	undertaken,	in	conjunction	with	the	recitation	of	the	prayer
of	
refuge
,	as	a	means	of	reducing	and	eliminating	
pride
.
	
Protectors	of	the	[Sacred]	Teachings
	
chos-skyong/srung-ma
,	Skt.	
dharmapāla
There	are	two	main	categories	of	protectors:	1)	supramundane	protectors,	such
as	
Mahākāla
,	
Ekajaṭ
ῑ
,	
Dorje	 Lekpa
,	 and	
Rāhula
,	 who	 are	 the	
wrathful
manifestations	of	
enlightened
	beings;	and	2)	worldly	protectors,	many	of	whom
were	originally	
malevolent	forces
	who	were	subdued	by	
accomplished	masters
such	as	
Padmasambhava
	
and	then	assigned	to	protect	the	teachings.	In	both

cases	their	activity	is	to	protect	the	
sacred	teachings
	and	its	sincere	practitioners
from	obstacles.
	
Provisional	Meaning
	
drang-don
,	Skt.	
neyārtha
See	under	
Definitive	Meaning
.
	
Pure	Illusory	Body
	
dag-pa’i	sgyu-lus
See	
Illusory	Body
.
	
Pure	Realm
See	
Buddha	Field
.
	
Pure	 Realm	 of	 the	 Sky-farers
	
dag-pa’i	 mkha’-spyod-kyi	 zhing
,	 Skt.
khecar
ῑ
kṣetra
The	pure	realm	or	fields	of	the	sky-farers	represents	the	level	on	which	the
awareness-holders
	
(
vidyādhara
)	are	said	to	abide.
	
Pure	Vision/Perception
	
dag-pa’i	snang-ba
In	 the	 terminology	 of	 the	
Nyingma
	 school,	 the	 expression	 ‘pure	 vision’
frequently	refers	to	a	type	of	revelation,	through	which	
meditational	deities
	or
accomplished	masters
	of	the	past	appear	in	a	vision	to	impart	their	teachings.
This	mode	of	pure	vision,	therefore,	has	some	affinity	with	the	revelations	of	the
treasures
	 (
gter-ma
).	 More	 generally,	 ‘pure	 vision’	 denotes	 the	 purity	 of
perception	of	
meditational	deities,
	symbolically	represented	by	their	respective
maṇḍalas
,	which	is	cultivated	in	the	
generation	stage
	of	meditation.	However,
the	Tibetan	equivalent	
dag-pa’i	snang-ba
	is	also	used	colloquially	to	mean	a
‘positive	perspective’	or	‘positive	outlook’	on	life.
	
Purification
	
sbyong-ba
,	Skt.	
śodhana
The	verb	‘to	purify’	has	two	distinct	meanings	in	a	Buddhist	context.	Firstly,
purification	 can	 refer	 simply	 to	 the	 purification	 of	
non-virtuous
	 habits	 or
dissonant	mental	states
,	etc.,	in	which	the	objects	of	purification	are,	without
qualification,	totally	eradicated	from	one’s	mental	continuum.	In	the	second

meaning,	which	arises	more	in	the	context	of	
tantra
,	the	term	‘purification’	has
rather	different	implications.	Here,	the	significance	of	the	word	is	understood	in
terms	of	transmutation	from	an	impure,	polluted	state	into	an	unstained,	purified
state.	This	process	
is	exemplified	by	the	practices	related	to	
Carrying	the	Three
Buddha-bodies	on	to	the	Path
	(
sKu-gsum	lam-’khyer
).	In	this	context,	the	phases
of	 ordinary	 death,	
intermediate	 state
,	 and	 rebirth	 when	 experienced
choicelessly	as	a	result	of	one’s	
past	actions
,	are	the	bases	of	purification.	The
meditations	 on	 the	
Three	 Buddha-bodies
	
are	 the	 purifying	 paths	 and	 the
accomplishments	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect
Resource
,	and	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
	
are	the	purified	results.
	
Purification	 of	 the	 Lower	 Realms
	
ngan-song	 sbyong-ba
,	 Skt.
durgatipariśodhana
This	 is	 the	
Tantra	 of	 the	 Purification	 of	 the	 Lower	 Realms
(
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra
	
),	which	is	recited	to	assist	the	deceased	in
avoiding	the	pitfalls	of	rebirth	as	a	sentient	being	trapped	in	the	three	
lower
existences
.
	
Quiescence
	
zhi-ba
,	Skt.	
śānti
This	is	a	synonym	for	the	quiescent	state	of	
nirvāṇa
,	in	which	all	
dissonant
mental	states
	and	misconceptions	concerning	
actual	reality
	have	ended,	and
rebirth	in	
cyclic	existence
	no	longer	occurs.	As	such,	it	is	the	antithesis	of	the
rebirth	process	(
srid-pa
).	See	also	under	
nirvāṇa
.
	
Rainbow	Light	[Body]
	
’ja’-lus
The	 appearance	 of	 rainbow	 light	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death	 is	 indicative	 of	 the
deceased’s	adeptness	in	the	practices	of	the	
Great	Perfection
	(
rdzogs-pa	chen-
po
)	or	in	certain	other	
perfection	stage
	practices.	There	are	many	incidents
recorded	in	Tibetan	biographical	literature	concerning	the	attainment	of	the
rainbow-light	body	at	the	time	of	death.	On	occasions	when	this	attainment	is
residual,	the	physical	body	will	shrink	dramatically	or	vanish	into	light,	leaving
only	the	hair	or	fingernails	of	the	deceased’s	physical	form	behind.	However,
when	there	is	no	residue,	the	entire	physical	form	will	vanish	into	light.	In	these
latter	cases,	the	body	of	rainbow	light	(
’ja’-lus
)	or	body	of	light	(
’od-kyi	sku
)	is
equivalent	to	the	attainment	of	the	
Buddha-body
	of	Great	Transformation	(Skt.
mahāsaṃkrāntikāya
,	Tib.	
’pho-ba	chen-po’i	sku
).	See	
Buddha-body
.
	

Ratna	Family
	
rin-chen	rigs
,	Skt.	
ratnakula
One	of	the	
five	enlightened	families
	(
pañcakula
)	into	which	the	
meditational
deities
	
of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	are	subdivided.	The	deities	of
the	
Ratna
	
family	include	the	peaceful	
buddhas
	
Ratnasambhava
	and	
Māmak
ῑ
and	the	corresponding	wrathful	aspects	
Ratna	Heruka
	and	
Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ
.
See	Appendix	Two.
	
Realisation
	
rtogs-pa
,	Skt.	
adhigama
This	refers	to	the	spiritual	experiences	that	a	practitioner	gains	through	insight
into	 and	 transformation	 of	 the	 mental	 continuum	 whilst	 on	 the	 path	 to
enlightenment
,	and	to	the	resultant	attainment	of	
liberation
	or	
buddhahood
.
	
Reality
	
chos-nyid
,	Skt.	
dharmatā
In	our	text	the	term	‘reality’	has	been	used	interchangeably	with	‘actual	reality’.
See	
Actual	Reality
.
	
Reality’s	Expanse
	
chos-dbyings,
	Skt.	
dharmadhātu
See	
Expanse	of	[Actual]	Reality
.
	
Refuge
	
skyabs-’gro
,	Skt.	
śaraṇagamana
This	term	in	Buddhist	usage	indicates	the	act	of	entrusting	one’s	spiritual	growth
and	well-being	to	the	
Three	Precious	Jewels
.	The	
Three	Precious	Jewels
	are
the	
objects	of	refuge,	and	the	nature	of	the	refuge	sought	from	each	of	the	three
differs.	In	the	
Buddha
,	the	fully	
enlightened
	teacher,	guidance	on	a	correct	path
to	
buddahood
	is	sought;	in	the	
sacred	teachings
,	the	
realisations
	of	the	path
are	 sought;	 and	 in	 the	
monastic/supreme	 community
	 (
saṅgha
)	 perfect
companionship	on	the	path	to	
buddhahood
	is	sought.	The	successful	taking	of
refuge	in	the	
Three	Precious	Jewels
	requires	the	following	two	conditions:	a)	a
genuine	anxiety	in	the	face	of	the	potential	for	future	
suffering
	and	b)	a	genuine
confidence	in	the	capacity	of	the	
Three	Precious	Jewels
	to	offer	protection	from
these	potential	
sufferings
.	In	the	context	of	our	text,	the	act	of	going	for	refuge
constitutes	the	first	of	the	five	uncommon	
preliminary	practices
	(
thun-min
sngon-’gro
).	Here,	the	three	levels	of	refuge	are	recognised:	the	outer	refuge
(phyi’i	skyabs-’gro
),	which	is	taken	in	the	
Buddha
,	the	
sacred	teachings
	and	the
monastic	community
;	the	inner	refuge	(
nang-gi	skyabs-’gro
),	which	is	taken	in
the	
spiritual	teacher
,	the	
meditational	deity
	and	the	
ḍākin
ῑ
	and	the	secret
refuge	(
gsang-ba’i	skyabs-’gro
),	which	is	taken	in	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,

the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	and	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
.
	
Relative	Truth
	
kun-rdzob	bden-pa
,	Skt.	
samvṛtisatya
See	under	
Two	Truths
.
	
Relics
	
gdung/ring-srel
See	under	
Bone	Relics
.
	
Renunciation
	
nges-’byung/spang-ba,
	Skt.	
naiṣkramya/prahāṇa
The	English	term	renunciation	translates	both	the	Tibetan	terms	
nges-’byung
	and
spang-ba
.	In	the	former	sense,	renunciation	refers	to	
Sākyamuni	Buddha
’s
renunciation	of	the	household	life	and	it	is	defined	as	a	mental	attitude	free	from
impulsive	clinging	to	all	worldly	attributes	such	as	wealth,	fame,	position	and
the	thought	of	a	favourable	rebirth	in	a	future	life.	It	is	only	on	the	basis	of	such
an	attitude	that	the	practitioner	can	spontaneously	generate	a	genuine	wish	to	be
free	from	
cyclic	existence
.	Hence	the	real	meaning	of	renunciation	lies	not	just
in	mere	physical	separation	from	objects	of	desire	but	more	importantly	in	a
quality	of	mental	
liberation
	which	is	free	from	even	the	slightest	degree	of
craving	for	mundane	values.	The	Tibetan	word	
nges-’byung
	literally	means	a
‘definite	emergence’,	indicating	a	definite	emergence	from	the	bonds	of	our
normally	narrow-minded	attachment	to	worldly	pleasures.	In	the	latter	sense
(Skt.	
prahāṇa
),	 renunciation	 refers	 to	 the	 four	 correct	 trainings	 which	 are
included	 among	 the	 thirty-seven	 aspects	 of	 the	 path	 to	 enlightenment
(
bodhipakṣikadharma
)	cultivated	by	those	aspiring	to	enlightenment,	namely:	1)
to	not	develop	
non-virtuous	actions
	which	have	not	arisen,	2)	to	renounce	non-
virtuous	actions	which	have	arisen,	3)	to	develop	
virtuous	actions
	which	have
not	arisen,	and	4)	to	not	renounce	virtuous	actions	which	have	arisen.
	
Rinpoche
	
rin-po-che
This	term	literally	means	‘high	in	value	or	esteem’,	and	in	ordinary	language
indicates	a	precious	jewel.	By	extension,	in	Tibetan	Buddhism,	the	term	has
come	to	refer	to	an	incarnate	master	who	is	‘high	in	value’	or	‘most	precious’.
Accordingly,	the	title	‘
Rinpoche
’	is	widely	used	by	Tibetans	to	refer	to	any
incarnate	
spiritual	teacher
.	See	
Tulku
.
	
Rite	for	Affirmation	of	Vows
	
’bogs-chog

The	rite	for	the	affirmation	of	vows	is	that	through	which	the	ability	to	fulfil	
and
restore	 impaired	
commitments
	 taken	 in	 association	 with	 the	
tantras
	 is
transferred.
	
Rites	of	Enrichment,	Pacification,	Subjugation	and	Wrath
	
zhi	rgyas	dbang
drag-gi	las
See	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened	Activity
.
	
Rites	of	‘Liberation’
	
sgrol-ba
The	rites	of	‘liberation’	refers	to	practices,	only	to	be	applied	by	
accomplished
masters
	who	have	attained	proficiency	in	
consciousness	transference
,	which
end	the	life	of	a	hostile	being	who	is	wholly	intent	on	vicious	negative	activities.
The	consciousness	of	the	harmful	being	is	compassionately	transferred	to	a
realm	of	higher	rebirth	thus	freeing	him	or	her	from	the	inevitable	consequences
of	their	future	and	
past	actions
.
	
Ritual	Officiant
	
las-mkhan
,	Skt.	
karmācārya
The	ritual	officiant	is	the	one	who	leads	the	students	into	the	presence	of	a
spiritual	teacher
	at	the	time	when	
empowerment
	is	conferred,	covering	the
students’	eyes	with	a	red	blindfold	and	placing	a	flower	and	a	
vajra
	in	their
hands.
	
Ritual	Service
	
bsnyen-pa
,	Skt.	
sevā
See	
Four	Aspects	of	Ritual	Service	and	Means	for	Attainment
.
	
Rosary
	
phreng-ba
,	Skt.	
mālā
The	Tibetan	rosary	generally	has	one	hundred	and	eight	beads,	and	is	used	for
the	counting	of	
mantra
	recitations.
	
Rudra
	
ru-dra
As	expounded,	for	example,	in	the	
Sūtra	which	Gathers	All	Intentions
	(
mDo
dgongs-pa	’dus-pa
)	and	later	
treasure
	(
gter-ma
)	revelations	as	well,	
Rudra
	is	the
embodiment	of	rampant	egohood,	a	being	who	assumed	a	powerful	malevolent
form,	having	misapplied	the	practice	of	the	
tantras
	in	a	previous	life,	and	who
was	consequently	subdued	by	the	
wrathful
	means	of	the	
buddhas
	
Hayagr
ῑ
va
	or
Mahottara	Heruka
.	The	metaphor	illustrates	the	origins	of	the	outer	attributes	of

the	
wrathful	deities
,	who	are	in	essence	the	
peaceful	deities
,	but	who	adopted
the	outer	terrifying	characteristics	of	
Rudra
	in	order	to	actively	confront	deep-
seated	egohood.	The	metaphor	illustrates	that	the	
wrathful	deities
	represent	the
spontaneous	process	of	transformation	of	the	outer	deluded	state	to	its	actual	or
enlightened	nature.
	
Sacred	Substances
	
rdzas
,	Skt.	
dravya
According	to	the	
tantras
,	ritual	substances	or	articles	are	employed	in	order	to
symbolise	the	bond	between	the	practitioner	and	the	
meditational	deity
	and	in
some	cases	these	actually	symbolise	the	
meditational	deities
	or	their	attributes.
In	the	context	of	an	
empowerment
	ceremony,	symbolic	implements,	such	as	the
vajra
	and	bell,	or	diadem,	vase	and	so	on	are	known	as	sacred	substances	of
empowerment	(
dbang-rdzas
).
	
[Sacred]	Teachings
	
[dam-pa’i]	chos
,	Skt.	
[sad]dharma
The	Sanskrit	term	
dharma
	carries	a	very	broad	range	of	meanings,	derived	from
the	Sanskrit	word	
dhṛ
,	meaning	‘to	hold’.	The	Tibetan	equivalent	
chos
	literally
means	‘change’	or	‘transformation’,	and	refers	both	to	the	process	of	spiritual
transformation	and	to	the	transformed	result.	Ten	classical	definitions	of	
dharma
are	given	
by	
Vasubandhu
	in	his	
Rational	System	of	Exposition
	(
Vyākhyāyukti
),
namely:	 phenomenon,	 path	 leading	 to	 enlightenment,	 attainment	 of
enlightenment,	object	of	consciousness,	merit,	living	thing,	scripture,	material
thing,	regulation,	and	spiritual	tradition.	In	terms	of	the	spiritual	tradition	of
Buddhism,	the	term	refers	specifically	to	the	second	of	the	
Three	Precious
Jewels
	(Skt.	
triratna
),	
i.e.
	to	the	sacred	teachings.	See	
Transmission
.
	
Sakya
	
sa-skya
One	of	the	four	principal	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	named	after	a	monastery
of	the	same	name	which	was	founded	by	
Khon	Konchok	Gyalpo
	in	the	eleventh
century	in	western	Tibet,	at	a	site	which	has	a	slightly	whitish	rock	surface.
Sakya
	
literally	means	‘pale	earth’.	The	widespread	influence	of	the	early	
Sakya
masters	soon	evolved	into	a	whole	new	school	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	the	school
reaching	its	full	maturity	during	the	time	of	the	
Sachen	Gongma	Nga
,	the	five
great	founders	of	
Sakya
,	and	in	particular	through	the	influence	of	perhaps	the
greatest	of	these,	
Sakya	Paṇḍita	Kunga	Gyaltsen
.	The	essence	of	the	
Sakya
school’s	thought	and	practice	is	enshrined	in	the	sets	of	instructions	called	‘the
path	and	its	fruit’	(
lam-’bras
).

	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
	
śākya	thub-pa
Our	historical	
buddha
,	who	is	considered	to	have	been	the	fourth	supreme
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
	to	have	appeared	during	this	particular	
aeon
	(in
which	context	
Maitreya
	is	regarded	as	the	fifth	or	future	
buddha
).	The	
Buddha
Sākyamuni
	is	considered	by	historians	to	have	lived	in	the	sixth	century	BC	and
is	 credited,	 according	 to	 Buddhist	 tradition,	 as	 the	 progenitor	 of	 all	 the
contemporary	 Buddhist	 lineages	 relating	 to	 the	
sūtras
	 and	 certain	 of	 those
related	to	the	
tantras
,	and	for	the	establishment	of	the	early	Buddhist	
monastic
community
.
	
Śākyasiṃha
	
śākya	senge
An	epithet	of	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
.
	
Sal	Tree
	
shing	sā-la
A	tall	tree	(
Vatica	robusta
)	indigenous	to	the	Indian	subcontinent,	with	wide
branches	and	thick	foliage.
	
Samantabhadra
	
kun-tu	bzang-po
The	male	
buddha
	
Samantabhadra
	is	the	foremost	figure	in	the	assembly	of	the
forty-two	
peaceful	deities
.	It	is	important	to	differentiate	the	male	
buddha
Samantabhadra
	
from	the	male	
bodhisattva	Samantabhadra
.	See	below	and
Appendix	Two.
	
Samantabhadra	(bodhisattva)
	
byang-sems	kun-tu	bzang-po
The	male	
bodhisattva
	Samantabhadra
	is	one	of	the	four	outer	male	
bodhisattvas
among	the	forty-two	
peaceful	deities
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
SAMAYA
	
rgya	rgya	rgya
Certain	chapters	of	the	present	work	end	with	these	words	of	admonition	that	the
seal
	of	
commitment
	(
samayamudrā
),	through	which	
buddha-mind
	is	secured,
is	to	be	resolutely	applied	by	those	who	receive	the	teaching.	See	
Seal
	and
Commitment
.
	
Saṃsāra
	
’khor-ba
See	
Cyclic	Existence
.

	
Śāntarakṣita
	
zhi-ba’i	’tsho	/	mkhan-po	bo-dhi-sattva
A	
monastic	preceptor
	and	exponent	of	
Madhyamaka
	philosophy	from	
Zahor
,
who	officiated	at	the	great	
Nālandā
	Monastic	University	in	India	before	his
arrival	in	Tibet	at	the	invitation	of	King	
Trisong	Detsen
	during	the	eighth
century.	In	Tibet,	he	was	responsible	together	with	King	
Trisong	Detsen
	and
Padmasambhava
	for	the	construction	of	
Samye
	Monastery,	the	first	Buddhist
monastery	to	be	built	in	Tibet.	King	
Trisong	Detsen
,	
Padmasambhava
	and
Śāntarakṣita
	 jointly	 established	 Buddhism	 as	 the	 state	 religion	 of	 Tibet.
Śāntarakṣita
	is	the	author	of	a	highly	influential	encyclopaedic	work	on	classical
Indian	philosophies	entitled	
Tattvasaṃgraha
	
and	a	short,	but	influential,	work	on
Madhyamaka
	known	as	
Ornament	of	the	Middle	Way
	(
Madhyamakālaṃkāra
).
	
Seal
	
phyag-rgya
,	Skt.	
mudrā
According	 to	 the	
sūtras
,	 the	 word	 ‘seal’	 denotes	 a	 secure	
realisation
	 of
emptiness
.	In	the	
tantras
	it	refers	to	the	various	hand-gestures	which	accompany
the	recitation	of	
mantras
,	and	by	extension	refers	also	to	the	
meditational
deity
’s	symbolic	hand-emblem	(
phyag-mtshan
)	-	the	
vajra
,	bell	and	so	forth.	In
this	context	therefore	the	seals	are	the	resonance	of	
buddha-body
.	Furthermore,
in	the	
Yogatantras
,	in	particular,	there	are	four	seals	which	secure	the	aspects	of
mundane	
consciousness
	
(
vijñāna
)	as	their	corresponding	aspects	of	
pristine
cognition
	(
jñāna
):	among	them,	the	
great	seal
	(
mahāmudrā
)	of	
buddha-body
secures	 the	
ground-of-all	 consciousness
	
(
ālayavijñāna
)	 as	 the	 mirror-like
pristine	 cognition
	 (
ādarśajñāna
);	 the	 seal	 of	 the	
sacred	 teachings
(
dharmamudrā
)	 of	
buddha-speech
	 secures	 the	 mental	 consciousness
(
manovijñāna
)	as	the	
pristine	cognition
	of	discernment	(
pratyavekṣaṇajñāna
);
the	seal	of	commitment	(
samayamudrā
)	of	
buddha-mind
	secures	the	deluded
consciousness	 (
kliṣṭamanovijñāna
)	 as	 the	
pristine	 cognition
	 of	 sameness
(
samatājñāna
);	and	the	seal	of	action	(
karmamudrā
)	of	
buddha-activity
	secures
the	five	sensory	consciousnesses	(
pañcadvāravijñāna
)	as	the	
pristine	cognition
of	accomplishment	(
kṛtyupasthānajñāna
).	Then,	according	to	
Mahāyoga
,	in	the
perfection	stage
	of	
mediation
,	when	the	practices	of	sexual	yoga	(
sbyor-ba
)	are
applied	 in	 order	 to	 actualise	 the	 union	 of	
great	 bliss
	 (
mahāsukha
)	 and
emptiness
,	the	term	‘action	seal’	(
karmamudrā
)	denotes	an	actual	sexual	partner,
while	the	term	‘seal	of	pristine	cognition’	(
jñānamudrā
),	by	contrast,	denotes	a
mentally	visualised	consort.	For	a	description	of	the	meditative	tradition	known
as	
Mahāmudrā
	see	under	
Great	Seal
.

	
Secret	Mantra
	
gsang-sngags
,	Skt.	
guhyamantra
See	
Mantra
.
	
Seed-syllable
	
yig-’bru
,	Skt
.	b
ῑ
jākṣara
	
Generally	this	refers	to	Sanskrit	syllables
or	letters	visualised	as	the	quintessential	basis	from	which	arise	the	forms	of
meditational	deities
	in	the	practices	of	the	
Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality
.
Often	these	letters	or	syllables	are	the	first	letter	of	the	name	of	the	deities
themselves,	or	syllables	or	letters	that	are	associated	with	specific	
enlightened
families
.	So,	for	example,	in	the	case	of	many	of	the	deities	belonging	to	the
Vajra
	
family
	of	
Aks
obhya
,	they	are	visualised	as	arising	from	the	letter	HŪṂ,
while	for	deities	belonging	to	the	
Padma
	
family
,	the	letter	ĀḤ	is	often	utilised,
and	so	on.
	
Self
	
bdag-nyid
,	Skt.	
ātman
For	an	introduction	to	the	concept	of	‘self’	as	it	applies	to	our	text,	see	the
Introductory	Commentary	by	HH	the	Dalai	Lama.	See	also	under	
Selflessness
.
	
Self-empowerment
	
rang-dbang
,	Skt.	
svādhiṣṭhāna
A	spiritual	practice	in	which	the	
four	empowerments
	are	received	directly	by
the	meditator	from	a	visualised	
spiritual	teacher
,	as	presented	in	Chapter	2	of
the	present	work.	See	
Empowerment
.
	
Self-identity
	
rang-bzhin
,	Skt.	
svabhāva
This	term	refers	to	the	
inherent	existence
	which	the	
eternalist
	philosophies	of
Hinduism	and	Jainism	project	onto	phenomena.	Elsewhere,	the	Sanskrit	term
ātman
	
(Tib.	
bdag
),	referring	to	the	notion	of	an	independent	or	substantial	self,
has	also	sometimes	been	translated	as	‘self-identity’.
	
Selflessness
	
bdag-med
,	Skt.	
nairātmya
Selflessness	in	Buddhist	philosophy	is	understood	to	imply	the	lack	of	
inherent
existence
	both	in	the	personality	and	in	physical	and	mental	phenomena.	The
Lesser	Vehicle
	schools	such	as	
Vaibhāṣika
	and	
Sautrāntika
	expound	the	doctrine
of	 selflessness	 only	 in	 terms	 of	 personal	 identity.	 They	 propound	 that
selflessness	refers	to	the	absence	of	an	independently	existing	‘self’	or	‘I’,
emphasising	 that	 the	 self	 is	 neither	 substantial	 nor	 self-sufficient.	 Nowhere

among	the	aggregates	of	the	person,	either	individually,	collectively,	or	even	in
their	continuity	can	one	find	a	substantial	or	solid	being.	Material	objects	are
nothing	but	a	series	of	indivisible	atomic	particles,	and	consciousness	is	nothing
but	 a	 series	 of	 indivisible	 time	 moments.	 However,	 the	
Cittamātra
	 and
Madhyamaka
	schools	extend	this	notion	of	selflessness	to	embrace	all	physical
and	 mental	 phenomena.	 All	 such	 phenomena	 are	 equated	 with	
emptiness
(
śūnyatā
),	and	these	
Greater	Vehicle
	philosophical	schools	therefore	speak	of
both	the	selflessness	of	persons	(
pudgalanairātmya
)	 and	 the	 selflessness	 of
phenomena	 (
dharmanairātmya
).	 Nevertheless,	 substantial	 philosophical
differences	exist	between	the	two	
Greater	Vehicle
	schools	in	their	views	on
what	it	is	that	is	being	negated	by	the	doctrine	of	
emptiness
.

	
Seeminal	Point
	
thig-le
,	Skt.	
bindu
The	Tibetan	term	
thig-le
	conveys	a	wide	range	of	meanings.	It	refers	to:	1)	the
pure	white/male	and	red/female	
generative	essences
	of	the	body,	which	along
with	the	
energy	channels
	and	
vital	energyes
	flowing	through	the	channels,
form	an	important	aspect	of	human	physiology	according	to	the	
tantras
	and
related	 medical	 traditions;	 2)	 a	 synonym	 for	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality
(
dharmakāya
),	known	as	the	‘unique	seminal	point’	(
thig-le	nyag-gcig
);	and	3)
the	seminal	points	of	light	which	appear	during	the	
All-surpassing	Realisation
(
thod-rgal
)	practices	of	the	
Great	Perfection
	
(
Atiyoga
)
,	and	also	during	the
intermediate	state	of	reality
.	See	Chapter	11,	Part	One.
	
Sense-faculties
	
dbang-po
,	Skt.	
indriya
See	under	
Sense-organs
.
	
Sense-organs
	
dbang-po
,	Skt.	
indriya
According	 to	 the	 analysis	 of	
abhidharma
,	 these	 comprise:	 the	 eye
(
cakṣurindriya
),	 the	 ear	 (
śrotrendriya
),	 the	 nose	 (
ghrāṇendriya
),	 the	 tongue
(
jihvendriya
),	and	the	physical	body	(
kāyendriya
).
	
Sensory	Activity	Fields
	
skye-mched
,	Skt.	
āyatana
The	operational	fields	or	contexts	in	which	sensory	perception	is	said	to	occur.
Abhidharma
	 sources	 identify	 twelve	 sensory	 activity	 fields	 (Skt.
dvādaśāyatana
),	six	of	which	are	designated	as	external	and	the	remainder	as
internal,	 divided	 into	 pairs	
as	 follows:	 the	 activity	 field	 of	 the	 eye
(
cakṣurāyatana
)	and	the	activity	field	of	form	(
rūpāyatana
),	the	activity	fields	of
the	ear	(
śrotrāyatana
)	and	of	sound	(
śabdāyatana
	
),	the	activity	fields	of	the
nose	(
ghrāṇāyatana
)	and	of	smell	(
gandhāyatana
),	the	activity	fields	of	the
tongue	(	
jihvāyatana
)	and	of	taste	(
rasāyatana
),	the	activity	fields	of	the	body
(
kāyāyatana
)	and	of	touch	(
spraṣṭāyatana
),	and,	lastly,	the	activity	fields	of	the
mind	(
mana	āyatana
)	and	of	mental	objects	or	phenomena	(
dharmāyatana
	
).
	
Sensory	Spectra
	
khams
,	Skt.	
dhātu
A	broad	term	denoting	each	and	every	aspect	of	sensory	perception,	including
the	sensory	subject,	object	and	their	interaction.	
Abhidharma
	sources	identify
eighteen	 distinct	 sensory	 components	 or	 psycho-physical	 spectra	 (Skt.

aṣṭadaśadhātu
),	 grouped	 as	 follows:	 those	 of	 the	 eye,	 form	 and	 visual
consciousness
;	those	of	the	ear,	sound,	and	auditory	
consciousness
;	those	of	the
nose,	 smell,	 and	 olfactory	
consciousness
;	 those	 of	 the	 tongue,	 taste,	 and
gustatory	
consciousness
;	those	of	the	body,	touch,	and	tactile	
consciousness
;
and	those	of	the	mind,	phenomena,	and	mental	
consciousness
.
	
Sentient	Being
	
sems-can/’gro-ba
,	Skt.	
sattva
/	
gati
In	a	Buddhist	context,	the	expression	‘sentient	being’	has	a	technical	usage
which	contrasts	with	the	concept	of	a	
buddha
.	The	term	refers	to	beings	in
cyclic	existence
	
and	also	those	who	have	attained	
liberation
	from	it	but	who
have	not	attained	the	non-abiding	
nirvāṇa
	of	fully	manifest	
buddhahood
.	The
Sanskrit	term	
gati
	(Tib.	
’gro-ba
)	literally	means	‘goer’,	and	
sattva
,	a	‘living
being’.	The	Tibetan	equivalent	of	the	latter,	
sems-can
,	literally	means	‘sentient’
or	 ‘a	 being	 with	
mind
’,	 as	 it	 does	 in	 English.	 See	
Sex	 Classes	 of
Sentient/Living	Beings
.
	
Serpentine	Water	Spirits
	
klu/klu-mo
,	Skt.	
nāga
/
nāgin
ῑ
Male	or	female	water	spirits,	often	depicted	as	half	human	and	half	serpentine,
who	 reside	 in	 oceans,	 rivers,	 lakes	 and	 springs,	 and	 who	 are	 described	 in
Buddhist	 literature	 as	 custodians	 or	 repositories	 of	 submerged	 spiritual	 or
material	
treasure
.	It	is	considered	important	that	their	environment	should	be
kept	 pristine	 and	 clean;	 otherwise,	 agitation	 or	 pollution	 can	 result	 in	 the
emergence	of	water	spirits	that	engender	leprosy,	consumption	and	various	skin
ailments.
	
Seven	Emanational	Oceans
	
rol-pa’i	rgya-mtsho	bdun
See	
Four	Continents	and	Eight	Subcontinents
.
	
Seven	Golden	Mountain	Ranges
	
gser-gyi	ri-bo	bdun
See	
Four	Continents	and	Eight	Subcontinents
.
	
Seven-limbed	Practise
	
yan-lag	bdun-pa
A	
preliminary	practice
	 which	 is	 normally	 undertaken	 as	 a	 prelude	 to	 the
generation	 stage
	 of	 meditation.	 The	 seven	 limbs	 together	 constitute	 a
comprehensive	 practice	 for	 purifying	 negative	 potentials	 and	 accumulating
merit
,	thus	laying	a	stable	basis	for	a	successful	meditational	session.	The	seven

limbs	in	their	proper	sequence	are:	1)	paying	homage	through	
prostration
,	2)
making	
offerings
,	 3)	 purifying	
non-virtuous
	
habits,	 4)	 rejoicing	 in	 the
wholesome	actions	of	others	and	oneself,	5)	requesting	the	
buddhas
	to	teach,	6)
appealing	to	the	
budddhas
	not	to	enter	into	
nirvāṇa
,	and	7)	the	
dedication	of
merit
.	Our	Chapter	5	includes	an	additional	three.
	
Seven-point	Posture	of	Vairocana
	
rnam-snang	chos-bdun
This	is	a	metaphor	for	the	ideal	or	recommended	meditation	posture,	in	which
the	 legs	 are	 crossed	 in	 the	 ‘
indestructible	 posture
’	 (
vajrāsana
),	 the	 back
straight,	the	hands	in	the	gesture	of	
meditative	equipoise
,	the	eyes	focused	on
the	tip	of	the	nose,	the	chin	slightly	tucked	in,	the	lips	and	teeth	set	in	their
natural	positions,	and	the	tip	of	the	tongue	touching	the	palate.
	
Sexual	Yoga
	
sbyor-ba
See	under	
Four	Delights
.
	
Signalessness
	
mtshan-ma	med-pa
,	Skt.	
nirlakṣaṇa
Signlessness,	along	with	
emptiness
	(Skt.	
śūnyatā
)	and	aspirationlessness	(Skt.
nirpraṇidhāna
),	is	regarded	as	one	of	the	three	approaches	to	liberation	(
rnam-
thar	sgo	gsum
)	which	are	the	hallmarks	of	the	teachings	on	the	
perfection	of
discrinative	awareness
	(Skt
.	prajñāpāramitā
).	Signlessness	is	the	antithesis	of
substantialist	views
	
(
mtshan-’dzin
)	-	the	perspective	that	grasps	at	the	inherent
existence	of	things	by	means	of	their	characteristics	such	as	colours,	forms	and
other	properties.
	
Single	Nature	of	Mind
	
sems	gcig-po
In	Chapter	4	of	our	text	the	phrase	‘the	single	nature	of	mind’	is	a	synonym	for
the	ultimate	nature	of	mind	(
sems-nyid
),	or	the	
actual	reality
	of	mind.
	
Six	Classes	of	Sentient/Living	Beings
	
’gro-ba	rigs-drug
,	Skt.	
ṣaḍgati
A	birth	in	
cyclic	existence
	is	characterised	as	occuring	among	one	or	other	of	the
six	 classes	 of	 living	 beings,	 depending	 on	 the	 nature	 and	 maturity	 of	 an
individual’s	
past	actions
.	The	six	classes	are:	1)	
gods
	(
deva
),	mundane	celestial
beings	whose	primary	mental	state	is	one	of	pride	or	exaltation,	2)	
antigods
(
asura
),	who	are	predominantly	hostile	and	jealous,	3)	human	beings,	who	are
influenced	by	all	five	
dissonant	mental	states
,	4)	animals,	who	are	under	the

sway	of	instinct	and	obfuscation,	5)	
anguished	spirits
	(
preta
),	who	are	under	the
sway	of	
attachment
	
and	unsatisfied	craving,	and	6)	the	denizens	of	the	
hells
(
naraka
),	 who	 are	 overwhelmed	 by	 hatred,	 anger	 and	 fear.	 Since	 all	 five
dissonant	mental	states	have	influence	on	human	beings,	it	is	not	inappropriate
to	 look	 upon	 all	 of	 these	 conditions	 also	 as	 extrapolations	 of	 human
psychological	states.	In	our	text	the	primary	causes	of	rebirth	in	each	of	these	six
realms	are	respectively	identified	as:	pride,	jealousy,	
attachment
,	
delusion
,
miserliness	and	hatred.	See	also	
Three	World-systems
	
.
	
Six	Dissonant	Menta	States
	
nyon-mongs	drug
,	Skt.	
ṣaṭkleśa
In	certain	instances	in	our	text	when	the	context	relates	to	rebirth	among	the	six
classes	of	beings,	this	enumeration	does	not	refer	to	the	well-known	
abhidharma
category	of	the	six	primary	
dissonant	Dental	states
:	
fundamental	ignorance
,
attachment
	
,	
aversion
,	pride,	doubt,	and	dissonant	or	afflictive	views,	but	to	the
six	poisons	(
dug-drug
)	that	are	said	to	generate	rebirth	among	the	six	classes	of
living	beings,	namely:	pride,	jealousy,	
attachment
,	
delusion
,	miserliness	and
hatred.
	
Six	[Emanational]	Sages
	
sprul-sku	thub-drug
	
See	under	
Six	Sages
.
	
Six	Intermediate	States
	
bar-do	drug
See	under	
Intermediate	States
.
	
Six	Kinds	of	Bone	Ornament
	
rus-pa’i	rgyan	drug
The	six	kinds	of	bone-ornament	worn	by	the	
wrathful	deities
,	which	symbolise
the	transcendence	of	death	and	
dissonant	mental	states
,	comprise:	necklaces
(
mgulrgyan
	
),	 bracelets	 (
gdu-bu
),	 earrings	 (
rna-cha
),	 crowns	 (
dbu-rgyan
),
bandoleers	(
mchod	phyir-thogs
),	and	human	ashes	(
thal-chen
).
	
Six	Lineages
	
brgyud-pa	drug
See	under	
Lineage
.
	
Six	Mantras	and	Six	Gestures
	
sngags-drug-dang	phyag-rgya	drug
A	series	of	
mantras
	and	gestures	used	for	the	empowerment	of	substitutes	or
offerings	made	to	harmful	or	obstructive	forces.	This	process	of	consecration	is
effected	by	means	of	the	following	six	
hand-gestures
	(
phyag-rgya	drug
)	and	six

corresponding	
mantras
	(
sngags-drug
):	1)	The	
hand-gesture
	of	the	
expanse	of
reality
	
is	 conjoined	 with	 the	
mantra
	
OṂ	 SVABHĀVA	 ŚUDHĀḤ	 SARVA
DHARMĀḤ	SVA-BHĀVA	ŚUDDHO	’	HAṂ,	which	purifies	the	ritual	object.
2)	 The	
hand-gesture
	 of	 the	 jewelled	 casket	 is	 conjoined	 with	 the	
mantra
NAMAḤ	SARVA	TATHĀGATEBHYO	VIŚVA	MUKHEBHYAḤ	SARVATHĀ
KHAṂ	 UDGATE	 SPHARAṆA	 IMAM	 GAGANA	 KHAṂ	 SVĀHĀ,	 which
expands	the	effigy	to	fill	all	of	space.	3)	The	
hand-gesture
	of	swirling	nectar	is
conjoined	with	the	
mantra
	OṂ	VAJRA	AMṚTA	KUṆḌALI	HANA	HANA
HŪṂ	PHAṬ,	which	transforms	the	effigy	into	a	vessel	filled	with	nectars.	4)
The	
hand-gesture
	 of	 vast	 potency	 is	 conjoined	 with	 the	
mantra
	 NAMAḤ
SARVATA-THĀGATA	AVALOKITE	OṂ	SAMBHARA	SAMBHARA	HŪṂ,
which	empowers	the	effigy	to	gratify	all	the	senses.	5)	The	
hand-gesture
	of	the
comet	of	knowledge	and	bestowal	of	gifts	is	conjoined	with	the	
mantra
	OM
JÑĀNA	 AVALOKITE	 SAMANTA	 SPHARAṆA	 RAŚMIBHAVA	 SAMAYA
MAHĀMAṆI	DURU	DURU	HṚDAYA	JVALANI	HŪṂ,	which	empowers	the
effigy	to	fulfil	the	hopes	of	all,	without	contention.	6)	Lastly,	the	
hand-gesture
of	the	universal	monarch	is	conjoined	with	the	
mantra
	
NAMAḤ	SAMANTA
BUDDHĀNĀṂ	 GRAHEŚVARA	 PRABHĀ	 JYOTENA	 MAHĀSAMAYE
SVĀHĀ,	which	ensures	that	the	effigy	will	pacify,	subjugate	or	transform	all
inimical	forces,	and	bring	about	a	successful	outcome	for	the	ritual	as	a	whole.
	
Six	Perfections
	
pha-rol-tu	phyin-pa	drug
,	Skt.	
ṣaṭāramitā
In	the	
sūtra
	system	of	the	path	to	
buddhahood
,	the	entire	
bodhisattva
’s	way	of
life	 or	 conduct	 is	 founded	 upon	 the	 practice	 of	 the	 six	 perfections	 which
comprise:	 generosity	 (
dāna
),	 ethical	 discipline	 (
ś
ῑ
la
),	 patience	 (
kṣānti
),
perseverance	or	joyous	effort	(
v
ῑ
rya
),	
meditative	concentration
	(
dhyāna
),	and
discrminative	awareness
	
(
prajñā
).	These	six	are	known	as	‘perfections’	when,
for	 example,	 the	 practice	 of	 generosity	 is:	 1)	 motivated	 by	 the	
altruistic
intention	to	attain	enlightenment
	for	the	sake	of	all	beings;	2)	undertaken
within	a	sixfold	combination	of	all	the	perfections;	and	3)	performed	with	an
awareness	of	the	
emptiness
	(
śūnyatā
)	of	the	agent,	the	act,	and	the	object	in
question.	As	an	aspiration,	the	word	
pāramitā
	is	used	to	denote	a	means	to
perfection;	 but	 when	 describing	 the	 perfected	 result,	 at	 the	 attainment	 of
buddhahood
,	 it	 means	 ‘transcendent	 perfection’,	 in	 accord	 with	 its	 literal
meaning,	‘gone	beyond’.
	
Six	Pristine	Cognitions
	
ye-shes	drug

The	 six	 arms	 of	 the	
herukas
,	 among	 the	 fifty-eight	
wrathful	 deities
	 (see
Appendix	Two),	symbolise	the	six	
pristine	cognitions
.	These	comprise	the
Pristine	Cognition
	
of	pure	expanse	(
dag-pa’i	dbyings-kyi	ye-shes
),	in	addition
to	 the	 standard	 enumeration	 of	 the	 five	
pristine	 cognitions
.	 See	
Pristine
Cognition
.
	
Six	Realms
See	
Six	Classes	of	Sentient/Living	Beings
.
	
Six	Sages
	
sprul-sku	thub-drug
The	six	sages	are	aspects	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
	(
nirmāṇakāya
)
which	 manifest	 in	 the	 realms	 of	 the	
six	 classes	 of	 living	 beings
,	 namely:
Indraśakra
,	 the	 sage	 of	 the	
gods
	 (
lha’i	 thub-pa	 dbang-po	 brgya-byin
)
,
Vemacitra
,	the	sage	of	the	
antigods
	(
lha	ma-yin-gyi	thub-pa	thag-bzang-ris
),
Śākyasiṃha
	or	
Śākyamuni
,	the	sage	of	humans	(
mi’i	thub-pa	shākya	seng-ge
),
Sthirasiṃha
,	 the	 sage	 of	 animals	 (
byal-song	 thub-pa	 seng-ge	 rab-brtan
),
Jvālamukha
,	the	sage	of	the	
anguished	spirits
	
(
yi-dvags-kyi	thub-pa	kha-’bar-
ma
),	and	
Yama	Dharmarāja
,	the	sage	of	the	
hells
	
(
dmyal-ba’i	thub-pa	chos-kyi
rgyal-po
).	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Six-syllable	Mantra
	
yi-ge	drug-pa
,	Skt.	
Ṣaḍakṣara
The	six-syllable	
mantra
	
(OṂ	MAṆI	PADME	HŪṂ)	is	that	of	
Avalokiteśvara
.
	
Sixty	Wrathful	Deities
	
kho-bo	drug-cu
A	collective	name	for	the	assembly	of	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deilties
,	with	the
addition	 of	 the	 two	 aspects	 representing	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Reality
:
Mahottara	 Heruka
	
and	
Krodhéśvar
ῑ
,	 who	 are	 respectively	 the	 wrathful
counterparts	of	
Samantabhadra
	
and	
Samantabhadr
ῑ
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Skilful	Means
	
thabs
,	Skt.	
upāya
The	concept	of	skilful	means	is	central	to	the	understanding	of	the	
Buddha
’s
enlightened	deeds,	including	his	teaching	of	the	many	scriptures.	From	a	very
early	 stage,	 Buddhism	 developed	 a	 hermeneutics	 of	 reading	 many	 of	 the

scriptures	attributed	to	the	
Buddha
	from	the	perspective	of	skilful	means,	that	is
to	say	from	the	perspective	that	the	truths	revealed	in	a	specific	teaching	may	be
contingent	on	the	needs,	interests	and	mental	dispositions	of	specific	types	of
individuals.	This	idea	of	skilful	means,	especially	in	the	context	of	acting	for	the
welfare	of	others,	such	as	through	the	giving	of	teachings,	was	applied	also	in
relation	to	the	altruistic	deeds	of	the	
bodhisattvas
.	According	to	the	
Greater
Vehicle
,	training	in	skilful	means	(Skt.	
upāyakauśalya
,	Tib
.	thabs-la	mkhas-pa
)
refers	to	the	first	five	of	the	
six	perfections
:	generosity,	discipline,	patience,
perseverance,	 and	
meditative	 concentration
	
;	 when	 integrated	 with
discriminative	 awareness
,	 the	 sixth	 perfection,	 they	 form	 a	 union	 of
discriminatve	 awareness
	 and	 means	 (Skt.	
prajñopāya
).	 The	 perfection	 of
skilful	means	is	also	separately	enumerated	among	the	ten	perfections,	where	it
indicates	 the	 inestimable	 result	 acquired	 by	 dedicating	 the	
merit
	 of	 one’s
virtuous	deeds,	however	small,	for	the	benefit	of	all	sentient	beings	in	general
and	for	the	sake	of	great	unsurpassed	
enlightenment
	in	particular.	In	the	
tantras
,
the	technical	term	‘path	of	skilful	means’	(
thabs-lam
)	refers	to	the	practices	in
which	 the	 internal	
sexual	 yoga
	 (
sbyor-ba
)	 of	 the	
energy	 channels
,	
vital
energies
	and	
seminal	points
	is	refined	within	the	
subtle	body
.	Also,	the	three
inner	classes	of
	
tantra
	according	to	the	
Nyingma
	school	are	sometimes	referred
to	as	the	‘vehicles	of	overpowering	means’	(
thabs	dbang-bsgyur-ba’i	theg-pa-
rnams
),	in	the	sense	that	they	carry	on	the	path	all	the	
dissonant	mental	states
which	are	renounced	in	the	lower	paths.
	
Sky-farer
	
mkha’-spyod-ma
,	Skt
.	khecar
ῑ
See	
Pure	Realm	of	the	Sky-farers
.
	
Spacious	Expanse
	
mkha’-dbyings
A	metaphor	for	the	secret	centre	of	the	female	deity	or	female	consort.
	
Spirit	Lords	of	the	Soil
	
sa-bdag
,	Skt.	
bhūmipati
According	to	Sino-Tibetan	elemental	divination,	the	spirit	lords	of	the	soil	are	a
class	of	geomantic	forces	whose	position	rotates	-	in	some	cases	according	to	the
years	of	the	sexagenary	calendar,	and	in	others	according	to	the	months	of	the
year,	the	days	of	the	month,	and	the	hours	of	the	day.	It	is	regarded	as	important
that	the	subterranean	locations	of	the	spirit	lords	should	be	known	at	the	time	of
constructing	a	building	or	
maṇḍala
,	and	before	entering	into	specific	activities.
	

Spiritual	Accomplishment
	
dngos-grub
,	Skt.	
siddhi
See	under	
Accomplishment
.
	
Spiritual	Friend
	
dge-ba’i	bshes-gsnyen/dge-bshes
,	Skt.	
kalyānamitra
The	term	‘spiritual	friend’	refers	to	a	
spiritual	teacher
	(Skt.	
guru
)	who	can
contribute	to	an	individual’s	progress	on	the	spiritual	path	to	
enlightenment
	and
who	acts	wholeheartedly	for	the	welfare	of	his	or	her	students,	adopting	a
renunciate	lifestyle.	In	Tibet,	during	the	eleventh	and	twelfth	centuries,	the	term
became	synonymous	with	the	great	masters	of	the	
Kadam
	school,	who	combined
a	scrupulously	renunciate	lifestyle	and	deep	humility	with	profound	scholarship
and	meditative	resolve.	In	later	centuries,	the	Tibetan	abbreviation	
geshe
	came	to
have	an	academic	usage	in	the	
Gelug
	school,	where	it	now	identifies	a	scholar-
monk	with	a	doctorate	title	in	traditional	Buddhist	studies,	and	is	similar	to	the
modern	usage	of	the	term	‘
khenpo
’	(
mkhan-po
)	in	other	traditions.	See	also
under	
Monastic	Preceptor
.
	
Spiritual	Hero
	
dpa’-bo
,	Skt.	
v
ῑ
ra
A	synonym	for	
awareness	holder
	and	for	
ḍāka
,	the	male	equivalent	of	the
ḍākin
ῑ
.
	
Spiritual	Sibling
	
mched-grogs/rdo-rje	spun-sring
In	the	context	of	the	
tantras
,	six	types	of	spiritual	sibling	are	identified:	1)
universal	spiritual	siblings,	
i.e.
	all	sentient	beings	who	from	beginningless	time
have	been	one’s	parents;	2)	spiritual	siblings	who	share	the	Buddhist	teachings;
3)	harmonious	spiritual	siblings,	who	are	similar	in	view	and	conduct;	4)	dear
spiritual	 siblings,	 who	 share	 the	 same	
spiritual	 teacher
;	 5)	 close	 spiritual
siblings,	who	receive	teaching	together;	and	6)	intimate	spiritual	siblings,	who
receive	
empowerment
	together.
	
Spiritual	Teacher
	
bla-ma
,	Skt.	
guru
The	original	Sanskrit	word	
‘guru
’	literally	means	‘heavy’	or	‘weighty’,	and	by
extension	a	‘venerable	teacher’.	The	Tibetan	equivalent	‘
bla-ma
’	(pronounced
lama
)	means	‘unsurpassed’	or	‘supreme’,	indicating	that	the	
guru
	is	unsurpassed
in	terms	of	being	the	perfect	object	towards	which	meritorious	activity	should	be
directed.	 However,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 note	 that	 specific	 qualifications	 are
necessary	in	order	to	be	considered	as	a	spiritual	teacher.	These	qualifications
differ	according	to	the	level	of	spiritual	practice	at	which	a	teacher	is	adopted.	In

the	context	of	the	
tantras
,	the	spiritual	teacher	is	said	to	confer	
blessings
	on	the
meditator,	 in	 contrast	 to	 the	
meditational	 deity
,	 who	 confers	 supreme
accomplishment
	and	the	
ḍākin
ῑ
,	who	confer	enlightened	or	
buddha	activities
.
Ultimately,	the	
guru
	is	one’s	own	
buddha	nature
.
	
Spontaneous	Presence
	
lhun-grub
,	Skt.	
anābhoga
In	the	esoteric	instructional	class	of	the	
Great	Perfection
	(
Atiyoga
),	the	term
primordial	purity	(
ka-dag
)	refers	to	the	ultimate	essence	of	
buddhahood
,	the
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	the	realisation	of	which	is	approached	through	the
practices	of	
Cutting	through	Resistance
	(
khregs-chod
),	as	described	in	Chapter
4,	and	spontaneous	
presence	refers	to	the	expressive	nature	of	the	
Buddha-body
of	Reality
	as	the	
Buddha-body	of	Form
,	the	realisation	of	which	is	approached
through	the	practices	of	
All-surpassing	Realisation
	(
thod-rgal
	),	as	indicated	in
the	emergence	of	the	luminosities	described	in	Chapter	11.	More	generally,	this
term	refers	to	spontaneous	or	effortless	activity,	the	fifth	of	the	five	kinds	of
buddha	activity
,	according	to	the	
Mahāyoga
	texts.
	
Śrī	Siṃha
	
shri	sing-ha
The	name	of	an	early	exponent	of	the	
Atiyoga
	teachings,	who	was	a	native	of
Shokyam
	in	Central	Asia.
	
Śrīmat
	
dpal-dang	ldan-pa’i	zhing-khams
,	Skt.	
Śr
ῑ
mat
The	southern	
buddha	field
	of	‘The	Glorious’	is	the	pure	realm	presided	over	by
the	male	
buddha
	
Ratnasambhava
.
	
Stūpa
	
mchod-rten
A	 sacred	 object	 representative	 of	
buddha-mind
.	
Stūpas
	 were	 originally	 a
symbol	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	constructed	in	a	dome-shape	to	hold	the
remains	of	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
.	The	veneration	of	
stūpas
	is	closely	connected	to
the	earliest	phase	of	the	
Greater	Vehicle
	in	ancient	India,	where	the	original
stūpa
	design	developed	within	the	central	monastic	assembly	hall	(Skt.	
caitya
).
The	
stūpas
	commonly	seen	in	Tibetan	cultural	areas	are	constructed	to	a	specific
architectural	design,	usually	in	the	shape	of	a	dome,	raised	on	a	square	base	of
several	layers,	from	which	rises	a	multilayered	spire.	In	monasteries	and	sacred
sites,	a	series	of	eight	
stūpas
	is	frequently	constructed,	symbolising	different
events	in	the	life	of	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
.	Others	are	extraordinarily	large,	like
those	 of	
Baudhanāth
	
and	
Svayambhū
	 in	 Nepal,	 or	
Sanchi
	 in	 India	 and

Borabudor
	in	Indonesia,	and	some	enclose	within	them	entire	
maṇḍalas
	of
deities,	such	as	the	
Pelkhor	Chode
	 at	
Gyantse
	 in	
Tsang
	and	the	Memorial
Chorten
	 in	
Thimphu
,	 Bhutan.	 The	 symbolism	 of	 the	
stūpa
	 is	 complex,
representing	 the	 progression	 to	
buddhahood
,	 the	
five	 elements
,	 the	 five
pristine	cognitions
,	and	so	forth.	Smaller	reliquary	
stūpas
	are	frequently	built	as
a	funerary	memorial	to	important	
spiritual	teachers
,	 often	 enshrining	 their
sacred	ashes	or	embalmed	remains.
	
Subduer
	
rtsad-du	gcod-pa
According	to	the	terminology	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	the	six	
herukas
	of	the
assembly	of	fifty-eight	
wrathful	deities
	are	given	the	title	‘subduer’,	referring	to
their	activity	of	
natural	transformation
	with	respect	to	the	
dissonant	mental
states
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Subjugation
	
dbang-gi	las
,	Skt.	
vaṣitakriyā
See	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened	Activity.
	
Sublime	One
	
’phags-pa
,	Skt.	
ārya
A	sublime	being	is	one	who	has	entered	into	a	direct	realisation	of	the	actual
nature	of	reality,	in	other	words	the	lack	of	
self-identity
	of	both	oneself	and
phenomena.	The	level	of	experience	of	an	
ārya
	is	stratified	in	relation	to	the
resultant	stage	of	the	
vehicle
	being	followed.
	
Substantialist	Views
	
mtshan-’dzin
,	Skt.	
lakṣaṇagrahaṇa
The	 mistaken	 apprehension	 that	 the	 form,	 colour	 and	 other	 characteristics
assumed	by	any	particular	entity	have	
inherent	existence
.
	
Subterranean	Goddesses
	
brtan-ma
An	 important	 class	 of	 twelve	 indigenous	 Tibetan	 spirits	 who	 personify	 the
mighty	snow	ranges	of	Tibet	and	who	are	gathered	within	the	outer	retinue
(
phyi-’khor
)	 of	 the	 fifty-eight	
wrathful	 deities
.	 Foremost	 among	 them	 are
Kongtsun	 Demo
	 (associated	 with	 Mt	
Namchak	 Barwa
),	
Machen	 Pomra
(associated	with	Mt	
Amnye	Machen
),	
Dorje	Chenchikma
	(associated	with	Mt
Everest),	
Do-rje	Kundrakma
	
(associated	with	Mt	
Nyenchen	Tanglha
),	and	
Dorje
Kuntizang
	(associated	with	Mt	
Nojin	Gangzang
).
	

Subtle	Body
	
phra-ba’i	lus
	Skt.	
sūkṣmakāya
In	contrast	to	our	gross	physical	body,	which	is	composed	of	flesh,	bones	and
blood,	the	subtle	body	comprises	a	network	of	subtle	
energy	channels
,	
vital
energies
	and	
seminal	points
	of	energy.	This	form	arises	as	a	natural	expression
of	the	interaction	of	the	subtle	
mind
	and	the	subtle	
vital	energies
	on	which	it
depends.	See	the	Introductory	Commentary	by	HH	the	Dalai	Lama.	The	most
advanced	level	of	subtle	body,	known	in	the	
tantras
	as	the	pure	
illusory	body
(
sgyu-lus
),	 is	 experienced	 only	 when	 an	 indivisible	 unity	 of	
buddha-body
,
speech
	and	
mind
	has	been	actualised	at	the	conclusion	of	the	
generation
	and
perfection	stages
	of	meditation.	A	similitude	of	such	a	subtle	body	can	be
experienced	during	the	practice	of	
dream	yoga
,	when	the	level	of	consciousness
is	relatively	subtle	and	deep,	due	to	the	temporary	cessation	of	active	sensory
processes.	The	
mental	body
	(
yid-lus
)	experienced	during	the	
intermediate	state
of	rebirth
	is	also	a	form	of	subtle	body.
	
Suffering
	
sdug-bsngal
,	Skt.	
duḥkhatā
In	a	Buddhist	context,	the	term	‘suffering’	is	used	in	a	broad	sense	and	includes
not	only	physical	sensations	but	also	mental	experiences,	that	is	to	say	all	the
essentially	unsatisfactory	experiences	of	life	in	
cyclic	existence
.	The	various
forms	of	suffering	can	be	categorised	into	three	groups:	1)	the	suffering	of
suffering	(
duḥkhaduḥkhatā
),	2)	the	suffering	of	change	(
vipariṇāmaduḥkhatā
),
and	3)	the	suffering	of	pervasive	conditioning	(
saṃskāraduḥkhatā
).	The	first
category	refers	to	all	our	physical	sensations	and	mental	experiences	which	are
self-evident	to	us	as	suffering	and	towards	which	we	have	spontaneous	feelings
of	 aversion.	 The	 second	 category	 includes	 all	 our	 experiences	 which	 are
normally	 recognised	 as	 pleasant	 and	 desirable,	 but	 which	 are	 nonetheless
suffering	in	that	persistent	indulgence	in	these	always	results	in	the	changed
attitude	of	dissatisfaction	and	boredom.	It	is	only	through	reflection	that	the
unsatisfactory	nature	of	such	experiences	can	be	realised.	The	third	category
refers	to	a	basic	level	of	suffering	which	underlies	the	round	of	birth,	sickness,
old	age	and	death.	This	suffering	serves	as	the	cause	of	our	experiences	of	the
two	other	classes	of	suffering.	It	is	called	pervasive	because	it	extends	to	all
forms	of	life	in	cyclic	existence,	irrespective	of	whether	or	not	life-forms	are
endowed	with	bodily	existence.	Suffering	is	identified	as	the	first	of	the	
four
noble	truths
	(Skt
.	caturāryasatya
	
),	which	were	taught	by	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
in	the	course	of	his	first	discourse,	and	the	entire	path	of	Buddhism,	embracing
all	its	
Vehicles
	(
yāna
),	may	be	seen	as	the	ways	of	eliminating	suffering,	thus

bringing	an	end	to	
cyclic	existence
	itself.
	
Sugata	Family
	
bde-bar	gshegs-pa’i	rigs
,	Skt.	
sugatakula
A	synonym	for	the	
Buddha
	
family
.	See	
Buddha	Family
.
	
Sukhāvatī
	
bde-ba-can-gyi	zhing-khams
The	western	
buddha	field
	of	‘The	Blissful’	is	the	pure	realm	presided	over	by
the	
buddha
	
Amitābha
.
	
Supernormal	Cognitive	Power
	
mngon-shes
,	Skt.	
abhijñā
Supernormal	cognitive	power	is	considered	to	be	a	by-product	of	advanced
meditation
	
,	 but	 similitudes	 of	 these	 powers	 are	 said	 to	 arise	 during	 the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth
	(
srid-pa’i	bar-do
).	Six	powers	are	specifically
enumerated:	clairvoyance	(
lha’i	mig-gi	mngon-shes
,	Skt.	
divyacakṣurabhijñā
);
clairaudience	(
lha’i	rna-ba’i	mngon-shes
,	Skt.	
divyaśrotrābhijñā
);	knowledge	of
the	minds	of	others	(
gzhan-sems	shes-pa’i	mngon-shes
,	Skt.	
paracittābhijñā
);
miraculous	abilities	(
rdzu-’phrul-gyi	shes-pa’i	mngon-shes
,	Skt.	
ṛddhyabhijñā
);
knowledge	 of	 past	 lives	 (
sngon-gnas	 rjes-su	 dran-pa’i	 mngon-shes
,	 Skt.
pūrvanivāsānusmṛtyabhijñā
);	and	knowledge	that	the	flow	of	all	corrupt	past
actions	 has	 ceased	 (
zag-pa	 zad-pa’i	 mngon-shes
,	 Skt.	
āsravakṣayābhijñā
).
Among	these,	the	first	five	are	said	to	be	mundane	powers,	whereas	the	sixth	is
possessed	by	
buddhas
	alone.
	
Supreme	Assembly
	
tshogs-chen
In	this	context,	a	synonym	for	
Monastic	Community
.
	
Sūtra
	
mdo
The	 original	 discourses	 which	
Śākyamuni	 Buddha
	 taught	 publicly	 to	 his
disciples	 as	 a	 fully	 ordained	 monk,	 consequent	 to	 his	 attainment	 of
buddhahood
.	In	the	context	of	the	three	successive	
turnings	of	the	wheel	of
the	sacred	teachings
,	the	
Buddha
	expounded	respectively	1)	the	discourses	on
the	doctrine	of	the	
four	noble	truths
	(Skt
.	caturāryasatya
),	2)	the	
Perfection	of
Discriminative	Awareness
	(
Prajñāpāramitā
	
),	
Ratnakūṭa
	 and	 related	
sūtras
which	emphasise	
signlessness
,	aspirationlessness	and	
emptiness
,	and	3)	the
Nucleus	of	the	Tathāgata
	(
Tathāgatagarbha
)	and	related	
sūtras,
	as	well	as	the
Sūtra	 of	 the	 Unravelling	 of	 Enlightened	 Intention
	
(
Sandhinirmocanasūtra
),

which	 emphasise	
buddha	 nature
	 and	 the	 thorough	 analysis	 of	
buddha
attributes
.	Among	these	the	first	category	is	the	corpus	of	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
sūtras
	 and	 the	 last	 two	 are	 the	
Greater	 Vehicle
	
sūtras
.	 The	 scriptural
transmissions
	of	the	
sacred	teachings
	of	Buddhism	comprise	the	canonical
sūtras
	
and	
tantras
,	as	well	as	their	commentarial	literature.
	
Sūtrayāna
	
mdo-sde’i	theg-pa
A	 term	 referring	 collectively	 to	 the	 first	 three	 of	 the	
nine	 vehicles
	 when
contrasted	with	the	six	vehicles	of	the	
tantras
.	See	also	under	
Greater	Vehicle
.
	
Symbolic	Lineage	of	Awareness	Holders
	
rig-’dzin	brda’i	brgyud-pa
The	
lineage
	through	which	non-human	and	human	
awareness	holders
	of	the
highest	
spiritual	accomplishments
	 symbolically	 receive	 the	 teachings	 from
bodhisattvas
	
of	the	tenth	level.	More	specifically,	this	refers	to	the	
transmission
of	advanced	
bodhisattvas
	such	as	
Mañjuśr
ῑ
,	
Avalokiteśvara
,	and	
Vajrapāṇi
	who
communicated	with	their	respective	disciples	(
gods
,	
serpentine	water	spirits
and	
mountain	or	sylvan	spirits
)	by	means	of	symbolic	gestures	rather	than
words.	It	also	refers	to	the	mode	in	which	the	earliest	human	progenitors	of	the
Atiyoga
	
lineage
	received	and	transmitted	their	highest	teachings.
	
Tantra
	
rgyud
The	Sanskrit	word	
tantra
	and	its	Tibetan	equivalent	
rgyud
	literally	mean	a
‘continuum’	 or	 ‘unbroken	 stream’	 flowing	 from	
fundamental	ignorance
	 to
enlightenment
	
.	
Tantra
	has	two	basic	meanings	in	Buddhism	-	it	refers	to	the
continua	of	ground,	path	and	result
,	and	to	the	literature	or	
tantra
	texts	which
expound	these	continua	in	the	context	of	the	classes	of	
tantra
	(see	below).	The
former	is	the	
actual	meaning	of	
tantra
.	Through	the	
continuum	of	the	path
(
lam-gyi	rgyud
)	 the	 primordially	 present	
continuum	 of	 the	 ground
	 (
gzhi’i
rgyud
)	is	realised	or	fully	manifested	as	the	
continuum	of	the	result
	(
’bras-bu’i
rgyud
).	Because	
tantra
	includes	sophisticated	techniques	which,	unlike	the	
sūtra
path,	 enable	 dissonant	 mental	 states,	 such	 as	 desire/
attachment
	 and
hatred/
aversion
,	to	be	transmuted	into	states	of	
realisation
,	without	renunciation
or	rejection,	the	practitioner	can	cultivate	an	uninterrupted	continuum	between
the	practitioner’s	ordinary	initial	mind,	the	advanced	mind	on	the	path,	and	the
resultant	fully	
enlightened	mind
	of	the	
Buddha
.	In	the	
Nyingma
	school	the
literature	which	expounds	this	dynamic	is	divided	into	a	sixfold	classification	of
the	three	outer	
tantras
,	namely:	
Kriyātantra
,	
Ubhayatantra
	
,	and	
Yogatantra
,

and	the	three	inner	
tantras
,	namely:	
Mahāyoga
,	
Anuyoga
	and	
Atiyoga
.	These
six	classes	represent	stages	of	ever-decreasing	emphasis	on	external	ritual	and
ever-increasing	subtlety	of	internal	
meditation
	together	with	an	ever-increasing
subtlety	of	the	
dissonant	mental	states
,	attachment	in	particular,	that	can	be
transformed	into	a	blissful	experience	conjoined	with	the	
realisation
	of	the
actual	nature	of	
reality
.	It	is	said	that	on	the	basis	of	the	fulfilment	of	the
generation
	 and	
perfection	stages
	 of	 the	 three	 inner	
tantras
	 fully	 manifest
buddhahood
	can	be	attained	in	a	single	lifetime.
	
Tathāgata
	
de-bzhin	gshegs-pa
A	synonym	for	
buddha
,	used	frequently	in	the	
sūtras
,	which	literally	means
‘One	Who	Has	Thus	Gone’.	The	expression	is	interpreted	in	different	ways,
corresponding	to	the	different	classes	of	
sūtras
	and	
tantras
,	but	in	general	it
implies	‘one	who	has	departed	in	the	wake	of	the	
buddhas
	of	the	past’,	or	‘one
who	has	manifested	the	supreme	
enlightenment
	dependent	on	the	
reality
	that
does	not	abide	in	the	two	extremes	of	existence	and	
quiescence
’.
	
Ten	Directions
	
phyogs-bcu
,	Skt.	
daśadik
The	four	cardinal	and	four	intermediate	directions,	as	well	as	the	zenith	and
nadir.
	
Ten	Opportunities
	
’byor-ba	bcu
See	
Eight	Freedoms	and	Ten	Opportunities
.
	
Ten	Similes	of	Illusory	Phenomena
	
shes-bya	sgyu-ma’i	dpe-bcu
The	ten	similes	which	illustrate	the	illusory	nature	of	all	things	are:	illusion
(
sgyu-ma
),	 mirage	 (
smig-rgyu
),	 dream	 (
rmi-lam
),	 reflected	 image	 (
gzugs-
brnyan
),	a	celestial	city	(
dri-za’i	grong-khyer
),	echo	(
brag-ca
),	reflection	of	the
moon	in	water	(
chu-zla
),	bubble	of	water	(
chu-bur
),	optical	illusion	(
mig-yor
),
and	an	intangible	emanation	(
sprul-pa
).
	
Terracotta	Imprints
	
tsha-tsha
Small	votive	images	moulded	with	clay	fashioned	in	the	form	of	miniature
stūpas
	
or	bas-relief	
meditational	deities
.	They	are	usually	empowered,	in	the
context	of	appropriate	rituals,	and	frequently	interred	within	a	larger	
stūpa
	or
kept	by	devotees	as	an	object	of	veneration.

	
Third	Empowerment
	
dbang	gsum-pa
The	third	of	the	four	empowerments.	See	
Four	Empowerments
.
	
Thirty-two	 Major	 Marks
	
mtshan	 sum-cu-so-gnyis
,	 Skt.
dvātriṃśanmahāpuruṣalakṣaṇa
See	
Major	and	Minor	Marks
.
	
Those	Gone	to	Bliss
	
bde-bar	gshegs-pa
,	Skt.	
sugata
An	epithet	of	the	
buddhas
.	The	expression	‘those	gone	to	bliss	of	the	three
times’	(
dus-gsum	bde-gshegs
)	refers	to	the	
buddhas
	of	the	past,	present,	and
future,	exemplified	respectively	by	
D
ῑ
pamkara
,	
Śākyamuni
,	and	
Maitreya
.
	
Thread-cross
	
mdos
In	its	simplest	form	a	thread-cross	can	be	two	crossed	sticks	or	a	simple	wooden
frame	(
nam-mkha’
)	around	which	coloured	threads	(
rgyang-bu
)	are	arranged	in	a
diamond	 or	 other	 more	 complex	 pattern.	 Thread-crosses	 vary	 in	 size	 and
complexity	depending	on	the	type	of	ritual	for	which	they	are	constructed.	In
essence,	they	represent	a	‘trap’	for	negative	and	malevolent	forces,	where	the
trap	symbolises	and	is	empowered	with	all	the	qualities	that	can	satisfy	the
negative	or	malevolent	force.	Thus,	the	design	of	the	thread-cross	can	closely
mirror	that	of	a	
stūpa
	
or	three-dimensional	
maṇḍala
	and	represent	the	purity	of
the	psycho-physical	
aggregates
,	
elemental	properties
,	and	sensory	and	mental
processes,	
etc.
	 On	 some	 occasions	 these	 complex	 thread-crosses	 can	 be
enormous	structures	up	to	tens	of	feet	high.
	
Three	Buddha-bodies
	
sku-gsum
,	Skt.	
trikāya
The	Three	Buddha-bodies	comprise	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	the	
Buddha-
body	of	Perfect	Resource
,	and	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
.	Jointly,	they
form	the	secret	object	of	
refuge
.	See	their	individual	entries,	and	also	under
Refuge
.
	
Three	Levels	of	Existence
	
srid-pa	gsum
,	Skt.	
tribhava
The	three	levels	of	existence	are	those	of	celestial,	terrestrial	and	subterranean
beings.
	

Three	Lower	Existences
	
ngan-song	gsum
,	Skt.	
tridurgati
See	
Lower	Existences
.
	
Three	Poisons
	
dug-gsum
Attachment
,	
aversion
	and	
delusion
.	See	their	individual	entries.
	
Three	Precious	Jewels
	
dkon-mchog	gsum
,	Skt.	
triratna
The	Three	Precious	Jewels	comprise	the	
Buddha
	(
sangs-rgyas
);	the	
sacred
teachings
	
(Skt.	
saddharma
,	Tib.	
dam-pa’i	chos
);	and	the	
monastic	community
of	monks	and	nuns	(Skt.	
saṅgha
,	Tib.	
dge-’dun
).	Together	these	three	form	the
outer	objects	of	
refuge
	(see	Chapter	1).	They	are	regarded	as	the	perfect	objects
in	which	
refuge
	can	be	sought	from	the	unsatisfactory	nature	of	life	in	
cyclic
existence
	 in	 general,	 and	 particularly	 from	 the	 potential	
suffering
	 of
unfavourable	future	existences.	They	are	called	‘precious	jewels’	because,	like
the	wish-fulfilling	jewels	of	Indian	classical	literature,	in	their	metaphorical
sense,	they	possess	the	wish-fulfilling	capacity	to	provide	protection	from	the
perils	of	
cyclic	existence
.	See	their	individual	entries	and	also	under	
Refuge
.
	
Three	Roots
	
rtsa-ba	gsum
,	Skt.	
trimūla
The	three	roots	jointly	form	the	inner	object	of	
refuge
,	according	to	the	
tantras
(see	Chapter	1).	They	comprise	the	
spiritual	teacher
	(Skt.	
guru
,	Tib.	
bla-ma
),
who	confers	
blessing
	(Skt.	
adhiṣṭhāna
),	the	
meditational	deity
	(Skt.	
iṣṭadevatā
,
Tib.	
yi-dam	lha
)	who	confers	
accomplishments
	(Skt.	
siddhi
);	and	the	
ḍākin
ῑ
(Tib.	
mkha’-’gro
)	 who	 confer	 the	 actualisation	 of	
buddha	 activities
	 (Skt.
kṛtyakriyā
).	See	their	individual	entries	and	also	under	
Refuge
.
	
Three	Times
	
dus-gsum
The	three	times	are	those	of	past,	present,	and	future.
	
Three	Vehicles
	
theg-pa	gsum
,	Skt.	
triyāna
See	
Vehicle
.
	
Three	World-systems
	
’jig-rten-gyi	khams	gsum
,	Skt.	
tridhātu
According	to	Buddhism,	
cyclic	existence
	includes	three	world-systems,	namely:
the	world-system	of	desire	(Skt
.	kāmadhātu
),	the	world-system	of	form	(Skt.
rūpadhātu
	
),	and	the	world-system	of	formlessness	(Skt.	
ārūpyadhātu
).	Among

them,	the	world-system	of	desire	is	a	state	of	existence	dominated	by	sensual
experiences,	particularly	the	sensations	of	suffering	and	pleasure.	It	is	inhabited
by	all	
six	classes	of	sentient	beings
,	including	humans	and	six	categories	of
gods
	(
kāmadevaṣaṭkula
).	The	world-system	of	form,	in	which	beings	have	a
comparatively	 subtle	 level	 of	 consciousness,	 temporarily	 devoid	 of	 gross
sensations	of	pain	and	pleasure,	is	regarded	as	a	state	beyond	ordinary	human
existence	 and	 inhabited	 only	 by	 gods.	 Birth	 in	 such	 a	 realm	 requires	 the
attainment	 of	 one	 or	 all	 of	 the	 four	
meditative	 concentrations
	 (Skt.
caturdhyāna
),	in	past	lives.	
Abhidharma
	literature	mentions	twelve	ordinary
realms	of	form	and	five	‘pure	abodes’	(
pañcaśuddhanivāsa
),	above	them,	where
birth	can	be	taken	consequent	on	these	four	concentrations.	Lastly,	the	world-
system	of	formlessness	is	regarded	as	the	highest	level	of	rebirth	within	
cyclic
existence
	and	a	state	where	an	individual’s	physical	faculties	exist	only	as
potencies	and	the	individual	functions	only	at	the	level	of	consciousness.	It	is
said	to	be	inhabited	by	those	who	have	mastered	the	
four	formless	meditative
absorptions
	
(Skt
.	catursamāpatti
).
	
Torma-offering
	
gtor-ma
,	Skt.	
naivedya/bali
Torma
-offerings	are	cakes,	usually	made	of	dough	and	often	decorated	with
colourful	 butter	 sculptures.	 Sometimes	 they	 are	 embodiments	 of	 the
meditational	deities
	
associated	with	particular	ritual	practices,	or	they	may	be
food-offerings	 presented	 to	 various	 deities	 or	
protectors
	 visualised	 in	 the
context	of	meditation.	Yet	again,	
tormas
	may	act	as	physical	symbols	into	which
diverse	aspects	of	negativity	are	absorbed,	transformed,	and	removed	through
ritual	practices.
	
Transcendent	Lord
	
bcom-ldan-’das
,	Skt.	
bhagavān
According	to	the	Tibetan	interpretation,	the	Sanskrit	honorific	term	‘
bhagavān
’,
which	has	often	been	translated	as	‘Blessed	Lord’,	indicates	a	
buddha
	who	has:
1)	 ‘destroyed’	 (
bcom
)	 the	 four	
malevolent/beguiling	 forces
	 (
caturmāra
)
comprising	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 psycho-physical	
aggregates
	 (
skandha
),
dissonant	mental	states
	
(
kleśa
),	sensual	temptations	and	mundane	death;	2)
come	to	‘possess’	(
ldan
)	the	six	excellences	(
ṣaḍguṇa
)	of	lordship,	form,	glory,
fame,	
pristine	cognition
	 and	 perseverance;	 and	 3)	 ‘transcended’	 (
’das
)	 the
sufferings
	of	
cyclic	existence
.
	
Transgressions
	
nyes-byas
,	Skt
.	duṣkṛta

The	
vows
	maintained	by	Buddhist	monks	and	nuns	include	the	avoidance	of
primary	 downfalls	 (Skt.	
āpatti
)	 and	 secondary	 transgressions.	 The	 term
transgression	(
nyes-byas
	
)	is	used	in	a	technical	sense	to	refer	to	a	whole	host	of
secondary	precepts	in	the	context	of	the	
monastic	vows
	of	individual	liberation
(
prātimokṣa
),	and	in	the	context	of	the	
bodhisattva
	and	tantric	vows.	The	list	of
these	 transgressions	 differs	 according	 to	 the	 context.	 See	
Commitment
,
Prātimokṣa
	and	
Vows
.
	
Transmission
	
lung
,	Skt
.	āgama
The	Buddhist	
sacred	teachings
	(
Skt.	saddharma
)	comprise	both	experiential
realisations
	
(
adhigama
;	 Tib.	
rtogs-pa
)	 and	 authoritative	 transmissions.	 The
latter	include	both	the	oral	teachings	and	sacred	scriptures	(Skt.	
pravacana
,	Tib.
gsung-rab
),	imparted	by	the	
buddhas
,	as	well	as	the	associated	commentaries	or
treatises
	 (Skt.	
śāstra
,	 Tib.	
bstan-bcos
),	 which	 have	 been	 transmitted	 in	 an
uninterrupted	
lineage
	
or	succession	from	ancient	times.	In	Tibetan	Buddhism,	it
is	 regarded	 as	 essential	 that	 a	 transmission	 of	 both	 the	 text	 and	 its	 oral
commentary	is	formally	received	from	an	authoritative	
lineage	holder
,	if	any
significant	 spiritual	 experience	 is	 to	 be	 cultivated,	 since	 a	 mere	 theoretical
understanding	of	these	topics	is	not	regarded	as	sufficient.
	
Transmitted	Precepts
	
bka’-ma
,	Skt.	
pravacana
From	the	perspective	of	the	
Nyingma
	school,	the	scriptures	and	oral	teachings	of
Buddhism	have	been	transmitted	in	two	distinct	ways:	through	the	long	oral
lineage	of	transmitted	precepts	(
ring-brgyud	bka’-ma
),	which	have	been	handed
down	from	one	generation	of	accomplished	teachers	to	the	next	since	ancient
times,	and	through	a	close	lineage	of	revealed	teachings	or	
treasures
	(
nye-
brgyud	gter-ma
),	whose	origin	is	more	recent.
	
Treasure-finder
	
gter-ston
An	
accomplished	master
	holding	an	authentic	
lineage
	who	successfully	reveals
a	hidden	
treasure
-text	or	sacred	object,	in	accordance	with	the	prophesies	made
by	
Padmasambhava
	 or	 a	 specific	 concealer	 of	
treasure
-texts.	 See	 under
Treasures
.
	
Treasures
	
gter-ma
,	Skt.	
nidhi
The	Sanskrit	
nidhi
	(Tib.	
gter-ma
),	translated	in	English	as	‘treasure’	or	‘revealed
teaching’	(
gter-chos
),	refers	to	those	sacred	Buddhist	texts	and	objects	which

were	concealed	in	the	past	in	order	that	they	might	be	protected	and	revealed	in
the	future	for	the	benefit	of	posterity.	The	notion	of	the	revelation	of	concealed
texts	 as	 treasure	 is	 extremely	 ancient	 in	 India	 and	 China.	 Within	 Indian
Buddhism,	it	is	well	known	that	the	
Perfection	of	Discriminative	Awareness
(
Prajñāpāramitā
)	
sūtras
	
were	 reputedly	 revealed	 when	
Nāgārjuna
	 received
them	in	the	form	of	treasure	from	the	
serpentine	water	spirits
	(
nāga
).	 A
recension	of	the	
sādhana
	class	of	
Mahāyoga	tantras
,	classified	as	
gter-chos
	by
Nyingma
	doxographers,	is	also	said	to	have	been	revealed	to	eight	great	masters,
including	
Nāgārjuna
,	in	the	
Ś
ῑ
tavana
	charnel	ground	near	
Vajrāsana
.	In	Tibet,
the	 tradition	 of	 the	 treasures	 was	 introduced	 by	
Padmasambhava
	 and	 his
students,	who	concealed	texts	and	sacred	objects	at	geomantic	power-places	in
the	landscape,	entrusting	them	to	their	respective	custodians	or	treasure-lords
(
gter-bdag
)	or	to	
ḍākin
ῑ
	for	safe	keeping,	with	the	prediction	that	these	would	be
discovered	at	some	future	time	by	a	prophesied	
treasure-finder
	(
gter-ston
).
Accordingly,	it	is	believed	that	the	students	of	
Padmasambhava
	
have	continued
to	emanate	in	the	form	of	
treasure-finders
	in	successive	centuries	in	order	to
reveal	 these	 treasure-teachings.	 Other	 kinds	 of	 treasure-teachings	 revealed
directly	from	the	
enlightened	intention
	of	
buddha-mind
	in	a	telepathic	manner
(
dgongs-gter
),	 or	 in	 a	 pure	 visionary	 experience	 (
dag-snang
),	 are	 also
recognised.	There	are	many	such	lineages	extant	today,	including	that	of	the
present	text,	and	they	are	maintained	mostly,	but	by	no	means	exclusively,	by	the
Nyingma
	school.
	
Treatise
	
bstan-bcos
,	Skt.	
śāstra
The	 term	 treatise	 (
śāstra
)	 in	 the	 Buddhist	 context	 generally	 refers	 to
authoritative	works	written	by	
accomplished	masters
	elucidating	the	profound
meaning	of	the	
Buddha
’s	scriptures	(
pravacana
).	Treatises	are	contrasted	with
scriptures	(both	
sūtras
	and	
tantras
),	the	latter	being	attributed	to	the	
Buddha
.
See	
Kangyur
	and	
Tengyur
.
	
Trichiliocosm
	
stong-gsum	’jig-rten-gyi	khams
,	Skt.	
trisahasralokadhātu
See	
Chiliocosm
.
	
Trisong	Detsen
	
khri-srong	lde’u	btsan
The	thirty-eighth	king	of	Tibet	and	son	of	King	
Tride	Tsukten
.	Despite	his
accession	to	the	throne	at	a	tender	age	and	the	opposition	of	ministers	who	were
Bon
	
sympathisers	he	established	Buddhism	as	the	state	religion	of	Tibet.	He

invited	 both	
Śāntarakṣita
	 and	
Padmasambhava
	 to	 construct	 Tibet’s	 first
monastery	at	
Samye
	
and	to	transmit	the	diverse	Indian	lineages	of	the	
vinaya
,
sūtras
	and	
tantras
.	He	became	a	realised	practitioner	of	the	
tantras
	in	his	own
right,	 under	 the	 guidance	 of	
Padmasambhava
,	 and	 actively	 sponsored	 the
education	and	projects	of	his	highly	organised	translation	teams.	According	to
traditional	 accounts,	 it	 was	 King	
Trisong	 Detsen
	 who	 requested
Padmasambhava
	 to	 give	 the	 teachings	 that	 are	 presented	 in	 our	 text.	 See
Gyurme	Dorje’s	‘Brief	Literary	History’.
	
Tulku
	
sprul-sku
,	Skt.	
nirmāṇakāya
	
In	its	philosophical	and	classical	usage	the
term	refers	to	the	
Buddha-body	of	Emanation
.	However,	based	on	this	concept
of	emanation,	a	different	usage	developed	in	Tibet	following	the	inception	of	a
tradition	to	formally	recognise	the	incarnations	of	high	spiritual	teachers	after
their	death.	The	first	such	
tulku
	to	be	given	formal	recognition	was	
Karma
Pakshi
,	the	second,	
Karmapa
	(1204-83).	Later,	other	important	
tulku
	institutions
emerged,	such	as	that	of	the	
Dalai	Lama
	
and	
Panchen	Lama
,	and	the	system	of
recognising	 successive	 generations	 of	
tulkus
	
became	 commonly	 established
throughout	Tibet	and	the	Himalayan	region.
	
Turning	of	the	Wheel	of	the	[Sacred]	Teachings
	
chos-kyi	’khor-lo	bskor-ba
,
Skt.	
dharmacakrapravartana
This	metaphor	refers	to	the	promulgation	of	the	Buddhist	teachings	by	the
Buddha
	and	continues	to	be	used	metaphorically	with	regard	to	the	teaching
activity	of	successive	
lineage	holders
.	The	
Buddha	Śākyamuni
	is	recognised	to
have	promulgated	three	sequential	‘turnings	of	the	wheel’.	The	association	with
the	concept	of	a	wheel	derives	from	a	comparison	with	the	‘wheel	of	sharp
weapons’	said	to	be	held	in	the	hand	of	a	
universal	monarch
.	Within	the	context
of	this	comparison	the	
sacred	teachings
	are	composed	of	ethical	discipline	(the
central	 axis),	 analytic	
discriminative	 awareness
	 (the	 sharp	 spokes)	 and
meditative	concentration
	(the	stabilising	perimeter).	See	also	
Sūtra
.
	
Tuṣita
	
dga’-ldan
Tuṣita
	is	the	name	of	the	fourth	of	the	six	
god
	realms,	which	are	said	to	be
located	within	the	
world-system
	of	desire	(Skt.	
kāmadhātu
).	It	is	regarded	as	the
current	abode	of	the	future	
buddha
	
Maitreya
.
	
Twelve	 Links	 of	 Dependent	 Origination
	
rten-’brel	 bco-gnyis
,	 Skt.

dvādaśāṅgaprat
ῑ
tyasamutpāda
See	under	
Dependent	Origination
.
	
Twenty-four	Power-places
	
yul	nyi-shu	rtsa-bzhi
,	Skt.	
caturviṃśatmahāsthāna
The	twenty-four	power-places	are	the	following	regions	of	the	ancient	Indian
subcontinent,	which	are	associated	with	the	
tantras
	of	the	
Cakrasaṃvara
	and
Heruka
	
classes:	
Jālandhara
,	
Oḍḍiyāna,	Paurṇagiri
,	
Kāmarūpa
,	
Mālava
,	
Sindhu
,
Nagara
,	
Munmuni
,	
Kāruṇyapāṭaka
,	
Dev
ῑ
koṭa
,	
Karmārapāṭaka
,	
Kulatā
,	
Arbuda
,
Godāvar
ῑ
,	
Himādr
ῑ
,	
Harikela
,	
Lampāka
,	
Kāñc
ῑ
,	
Saurāṣṭra
,	
Kaliṅga
,	
Kokaṇa
,
Caritra
,	
Kośala
,	and	
Vindhyākaumārapaurikā
.
	
Two	Accumulations
	
tshogs-gnyis
,	Skt.	
sambhāradvaya
See	under	
Accumulations
.
	
Two	Extremes
	
mtha’	gnyis
,	Skt.	
antadvaya
The	two	extremes	of	eternalism	and	nihilism.	See	under	
Eternalist
	and	
Nihilist
.
	
Two	Truths
	
bden-pa	gnyis
,	Skt.	
satyadvaya
All	Buddhist	philosophical	schools	of	thought	formulate	their	ontology	within
the	 framework	 of	 the	 two	 truths,	 the	 conventional	 or	 relative	 truth	 (Skt.
samvṛtisatya
,	 Tib.	
kun-rdzob	 bden-pa
)	 and	 the	 ultimate	 truth	 (Skt.
paramārthasatya
,	Tib.	
don-dam	bden-pa
).	However,	the	definition	of	the	two
truths	differs	according	to	their	different	epistemological	interpretations.	The
Cittamātra
	and	
Madhyamaka
,	the	two	
Greater	Vehicle
	schools	of	thought	which
emphasise	the	doctrine	of	the	two	truths,	define	the	ultimate	truth	as	a	synonym
of	
emptiness
,	the	ultimate	nature	of	phenomena,	while	the	conventional	truth	is
defined	as	the	empirical	aspect	of	reality	as	conventionally	experienced	through
our	 perceptions.	 Such	 an	 aspect	 of	 reality	 is	 true	 only	 within	 the	 relative
framework	of	our	own	veridical	experiences.	However,	according	to	the	various
tantra
	
vehicles
	there	are	increasing	degrees	of	subtlety	in	the	interpretation	of
the	two	truths.
	
Ubhayatantra
	
gnyis-ka’i	rgyud
Ubhayatantra
,	also	known	as	
Caryātantra
,	is	the	second	of	the	three	outer
classes	of	
tantra
,	which	form	one	subcategory	of	the	six	classes	of	
tantra
,	and
the	fifth	of	the	
nine	vehicles
,	according	to	the	
Nyingma
	school	of	Tibetan

Buddhism.	
Ubhayatantra
	
places	an	equal	emphasis	on	both	external	ritual	and
internal	meditation.
	
Ultimate	Truth
	
don-dam	bden-pa
,	Skt.	
paramārthasatya
See	under	
Two	Truths
.
	
Unique	Seminal	Point
	
thig-le	nyag-gcig
According	to	
Atiyoga
,	this	expression	is	a	synonym	for	the	
Buddha-body	of
Reality
.	For	the	range	of	meanings	conveyed	by	the	Tibetan	term	
thig-le
,	see
Seminal	Point
.
	
Universal	Monarch
	
khor-lo	bsgyur-ba
,	Skt.	
cakravartin
In	the	context	of	Indo-Tibetan	Buddhism,	the	concept	of	the	benign	universal
monarch	 or	 emperor	 who	 rules	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 law	 of	 the	
sacred
teachings
	
of	Buddhism	is	one	that	has	permeated	Buddhist	literature	since	the
time	of	
Aśoka
.	Their	appearance	in	the	world	is	considered	a	unique	and	rare
event,	just	as	the	appearance	of	a	
buddha
	is	considered	to	be	unique	and	rare.
	
Unsurpassed	Yogatantra
	
bla-med	rgyud
,	Skt.	
Yoganiruttaratantra
The	highest	among	the	four	classes	of	
tantra
,	the	other	three	being:	
Kriyā
,
Caryā
,	and	
Yoga	tantra
.	The	differences	between	the	four	classes	of	
tantra
represent	 stages	 of	 ever-decreasing	 emphasis	 on	 external	 ritual	 and	 ever-
increasing	subtlety	of	internal	
meditation.
	
Niruttara
	means	‘unsurpassed’	or
‘highest’	and	it	is	in	
the	
Yoganiruttara	
tantras
	that	the	meditative	techniques	for
realising	the	
Three	buddha-bodies
	are	the	most	subtle	and	refined.	There	are
two	distinct	phases	in	the	dissemination	of	the	Unsurpassed	
Yogatantras
	in	Tibet,
which	are	reflected	in	two	differing	ways	of	classifying	them.	According	to	the
Nyingma
	school,	the	earlier	phase	of	dissemination,	they	are	classified	into
Mahāyoga
,	
Anuyoga
	and	
Atiyoga
,	whereas	the	later	schools	classify	them	into
Father,	Mother	and	Non-dual	or	Indivisible	
tantras
.
	
Uṣṇīṣavijayā
	
gtsug-gtor	rnam-rgyal-ma
One	 of	 the	 three	 principal	 meditational	 deities	 associated	 with	 longevity
practices	and	the	subject	of	five	principal	
dhāraṇ
ῑ
	incarnations,	
Uṣṇ
ῑ
savijayā
generally	assumes	a	slightly	wrathful	appearance,	with	three	faces	(white,	yellow
and	pale	blue)	and	eight	arms	holding	diverse	symbolic	implements.	She	is

seated	with	her	legs	folded,	in	the	
indestructible	posture
.
	
Vaiḍūryaprabharāja
	
sang-rgyas	sman-bla
The	
Buddha
	of	Medicine,	the	principal	figure	in	the	Buddhist	medical	
tantras
,
who	is	regarded	as	the	progenitor	of	the	
Four	Tantras	of	Medicine
	(
rGyud-bzhi
).
According	to	certain	sources	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
	is	believed	to	have	assumed	a
specific	form	when	teaching	the	medical	
tantras
	and	that	aspect	of	the	
Buddha
is	called	
Vaiḍūryaprabharāja
,	the	‘King	of	Blue	Beryl	Light’.	He	is	normally
depicted	in	paintings	as	being	blue	in	colour	and	holding	in	his	left	palm	an	alms
bowl	filled	with	the	fruits	of	a	medicinal	plant,	chebulic	myrobalan.	According
to	the	
lineage
	
of	the	medical	
tantras
,	there	are	eight	different	aspects	of	the
Medicine	
Buddha
,	of	which	
Vaiḍūryaprabharāja
	is	the	foremost.
	
Vajra
	
rdo-rje
In	the	sense	of	
rdo-rje	pha-lam
	(pronounced	‘
dorje	phalam
’),	this	term	means
the	diamond,	literally	‘the	sovereign	among	all	stones’.	In	Buddhism	however
rdo-rje
	
indicates	the	indestructible	reality	of	
buddhahood
,	which	is	defined	as
both	imperishable	(
mi-gshigs
)	and	indivisible	(
ma-phyed
).	The	emblem	symbolic
of	this	indestructible	reality	is	also	known	as	
rdo-rje
	or	
vajra
.	This	is	a	sceptre-
like	
tantric
	ritual	object	which	is	held	in	the	right	palm	usually	whenever	playing
a	ritual	bell.	The	sceptre	symbolises	
skilful	means
	and	the	bell	
discriminative
awareness
.	Holding	these	together	in	the	two	palms	represents	the	perfect	union
of	
discriminative	awareness
	and	
skilful	means
.	
Vajrā
,	also	known	as	
Piṅgalā
(
dmar-mo
),	is	the	name	given	to	the	first	of	the	six	
yogin
ῑ
	from	the	south,	a
subcategory	of	the	twenty-eight	
Īśvar
ῑ
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Vajra-brothers	and	sisters
	
rdo-rje	ming-sring
The	most	intimate	of	spiritual	siblings	(
mched-grogs
),	with	whom	one	shares
empowerments
	and	
commitments
.	See	
Spiritual	Sibling
.
	
Vajra	Family
	
rdo-rje’i	rigs
,	Skt.	
vajrakula
One	of	the	
five	enlightened	families
	(
pañcakula
)	into	which	the	
meditational
deities
	
of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
	are	subdivided.	The	deities	of
the	
Vajra
	
family	 include	 the	 peaceful	
buddhas
	
Akṣobhya-Vajrasattva
	 and
Buddhalocanā
	 and	 the	 corresponding	 wrathful	 aspects	
Vajra	 Heruka
	 and
Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ
.	See	Appendix	Two.

	
Vajra-master
	
rdo-rje	slob-dpon
,	Skt.	
vajrācārya
The	 ‘master	 of	 indestructible	 reality’	 who	 presides	 over	
empowerment
ceremonies	
and	the	related	ritual	dances	of	the	great	
means	for	attainment
	(Skt.
mahāsādhana
,	Tib.	
sgrub-chen
),	embodying	the	central	
meditational	deity
	of
the	
maṇḍala
.
	
Vajradhara
	
rdo-rje	’chang
Vajradhara
	(lit.	‘vajra-holder’)	is	an	expression	of	the	
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,
spontaneously	arising	from	the	pure,	pristine	expanse	of	
inner	radiance
,	in	a
form	 complete	 with	 all	 the	 characteristics	 of	 the	
Buddha-body	 of	 Perfect
Resource
.	
Vajradhara
	
is	thus	regarded	as	the	root	of	all	the	
five	enlightened
families
	and	consequently	he	is	also	known	as	the	lord	of	the	sixth	
enlightened
family
.	Many	
tantra
	
texts	and	
lineages
	attribute	their	origin	directly	to	the
Buddha-body	of	Reality
	-	represented	in	the	form	of	either	
Samantabhadra
	or
Vajradhara
.	Other	
tantra
	texts	and	
lineages
	claim	that	
Vajradhara
	is	a	form
assumed	 by	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
	 when	 giving	 esoteric	 teachings	 on	
tantra
.
Vajradhara
	 is	 said	 to	 become	 manifest	 when	 one	 has	 totally	 overcome	 all
dualistic	conceptions	and	actualised	
buddhahood
.	He	is	usually	depicted	as
seated	and	holding	a	
vajra
	and	bell	in	his	crossed	palms.
	
Vajrakīla
	
rdo-rje	phur-ba
One	of	the	eight	foremost	
meditational	deities
	according	to	the	‘
means	for
attainment
	
’	class	of	
Mahāyoga
.	
Vajrak
ῑ
la
	is	dark	blue	in	colour	with	three
faces	and	six	arms,	the	central	pair	of	hands	holding	a	ritual	dagger	(Skt.	
k
ῑ
la
).
Often	the	lower	part	of	his	body	is	also	visualised	in	the	form	of	a	ritual	dagger,
the	 three	 facets	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 blade	 representing	 the	 transformation	 of
delusion
,	
attachment
	and	
aversion
.	
Vajrak
ῑ
la
	is	representative	of	the	natural
expression	of	
buddha	activity
.
	
Vajrakumāra
	
rdo-rje	gzhon-nu
An	aspect	of	the	
meditational	deity
	
Vajrak
ῑ
la
.	See	under	
Vajrakīla
.
	
Vajrapāṇi
	
phyag-na	rdo-rje
	
The	embodiment	of	the	spiritual	
power
	(
bala
)	and
skilful	means
	of	all	the	
buddhas
	
as	visualised	in	the	form	of	a	
meditational
deity
.	
Vajrapāṇi
	is	generally	depicted	as	being	
wrathful
	in	aspect,	holding	a

vajra
	in	his	right	upraised	hand	and	a	skull-cup	in	his	left.	In	peaceful	form
Vajrapāṇi
	 is	 also	 one	 of	 the	 eight	 male	
bodhisattvas
	
among	 the	 forty-two
peaceful	deities
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Vajrasattva
	
rdo-rje	sems-dpa’
Vajrasattva
,	or	in	literal	translation	‘the	spiritual	hero	of	indestructible	reality’,
has	two	principal	forms.	Firstly,	in	the	context	of	the	
Guhyagarbha	tantra
,	and
related	 texts,	 he	 is	 identified	 with	 the	 peaceful	 male	
buddha
	
Akṣobhya-
Vajrasattva
.	See	Appendix	Two.	Secondly,	in	the	context	of	the	
preliminary
practices
	(
sngon-’gro
)	of	
meditation
,	the	recitation	of	
Vajrasattva
’s	
Hundred-
syllable	Mantra
	(
yig-brgya
)	purifies	
negativities
,	
obsurations
,	
transgressions
,
and	
downfalls
	(see	Chapter	1).	In	this	latter	context,	
Vajrasattva
	is	visualised	as
white	in	colour,	dressed	in	the	silken	garments	and	ornaments	of	a	
bodhisattva
,
and	holding	a	
vajra
	in	his	right	palm	close	to	the	heart	and	a	bell	in	his	left	hand
close	to	the	left	side	of	his	hip.	Sometimes,	both	forms	of	
Vajrasattva
	are
integrated	in	a	single	practice,	as	in	Chapter	5	of	the	present	work,	where
practitioners	first	visualise	the	white	form	of	
Vajrasattva
,	before	visualising	the
forty-two	
peaceful	deities
,	including	
Akṣobhya-Vajrasattva
,	within	their	hearts.
As	a	
lineage	holder
,	
Vajrasattva
	is	credited	with	the	transmission	of	
Atiyoga
into	the	human	world,	appearing	in	the	form	of	the	
deva	Adhicitta
	
(
lhag-sems-
can
)	before	
Prahevajra
	(
dga’-rab	rdo-rje
)	in	a	vision.	According	to	the	
Great
Perfection
,	
Vajrasattva
	 is	 sometimes	 used	 synonymously	 to	 indicate	 the
Buddha-body	of	Reality
,	and	as	such	is	identical	to	
Samantabhadra
.
	
Vajrayāna
	
rdo-rje’i	theg-pa
See	
Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality
.
	
Vehicle
	
theg-pa
,	Skt.	
yāna
The	term	‘vehicle’	suggests	a	dynamic	momentum	leading	to	the	attainment	of
nirvāṇa
.	Although	from	one	standpoint	there	may	be	as	many	vehicles	as	there
are	thoughts	arising	in	the	mind,	the	
sacred	teachings
	are	classified	into	distinct
vehicles	according	to	their	power.	Accordingly,	the	expression	‘two	vehicles’
refers	to	the	distinction	between	the	
Lesser	Vehicle
	and	the	
Greater	Vehicle
,	the
expression	‘
three	Vehicles
’	or	‘three	causal	vehicles’	refers	to	the	vehicles	of
pious	attendants
,	
hermit	buddhas
	and	
bodhisattvas
.	The	division	into	‘
nine
vehicles
’,	which	corresponds	to	the	
Nyingma
	classification,	includes	the	three
causal	vehicles	of	the	
pious	attendants
,	
hermit	buddhas
	and	
bodhisattvas
,	and

the	six	resultant	vehicles	of	
Kriyātantra
,	
Ubhayatantra
,	
Yogatantra
,	
Mahāyoga
,
Anuyoga
	(
rjes-su	rnal-’byor-gyi	theg-pa
),	and	
Atiyoga
	(
shin-tu	rnal-’byor-gyi
theg-pa
).
	
Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality
	
rdo-rje’i	theg-pa
,	Skt.	
Vajrayāna
The	Vehicle	of	Indestructible	Reality	comprises,	in	the	
Nyingma
	classification,
the	six	resultant	vehicles	of	the	
tantras
,	so-called	because	the	indestructible	and
imperishable	realities	of	
buddha-body
,	
speech
	and	
mind
	are	fully	realised	and
manifested	 when	 the	
continuum	 of	 the	 ground
	 is	 transformed	 into	 the
continuum	of	the	result
	by	means	of	the	
continuum	of	the	path
.	See	under
Tantra
.	 It	 is	 also	 known	 as	 the	 Vehicle	 of	
Secret
	
Mantras
	 (Skt.
Guhyamantrayāna
)	because	engaging	in	this	path	ensures	the	protection	of	the
mind	from	dualistic	perceptions	and	conceptions.	See	
Mantra
.
	
Vidyādhara
	
rig-’dzin
See	under	
Awareness	Holder
.
	
Vinaya
	
’dul-ba
The	Sanskrit	term	
vinaya
,	literally	meaning	‘discipline’,	refers	to	the	monastic
discipline	maintained	by	members	of	the	Buddhist	community,	including	the
ethical	codes	which	regulate	the	life	of	fully	ordained	monks	and	nuns,	as	well
as	probationary	nuns,	novice	monks	and	nuns,	and	male	and	female	laity.	The
collection	of	
Śākyamuni	Buddha
’s	discourses	which	elucidate	and	define	the
principles	of	these	ethical	codes	(including	the	administrative	guidelines	for
running	a	monastery)	is	known	as	the	
vinayapiṭaka
,	which	is	one	of	the	three
primary	collections	of	discourses	comprising	the	Buddhist	canon	(Skt.	
tripiṭaka
).
Based	on	different	interpretations	relating	to	the	subtler	points	of	the	
Buddha
’s
discourses	on	
vinaya
,	there	emerged,	in	ancient	India,	several	distinct	schools,
including	the	
Sthaviravāda
,	
Sarvāstivāda
,	
Mahāsaṅghika
	and	
Sammit
ῑ
ya
.	The
vinaya
	 tradition	 which	 became	 predominant	 in	 Tibet	 is	 that	 of	 the
Sarvāstivādins
.	See	
Vows
	and	
Prātimokṣa
.
	
Virtuous	Action
	
dge-ba
,	Skt.	
kuśala
Both	 virtue	 and	 its	 opposite,	 non-virtue	 (Skt.	
akuśala
,	 Tib.	
mi-dge-ba
)	 are
defined	in	terms	of	both	motivation	and	the	consequences	of	the	action.	In	order
for	an	action	to	be	defined	as	either	virtuous	or	non-virtuous,	there	are	certain
prerequisite	features	which	must	be	present.	These	are:	motivation,	the	actual

execution	of	the	
act,	and	the	conclusion.	An	act	is	non-virtuous	if	it	is:	1)
motivated	by	negative	intentions;	2)	committed	by	the	agent	in	a	sane	mind	and
with	full	knowledge;	and	3)	the	person	derives	a	sense	of	satisfaction	from
having	accomplished	the	act.	Such	actions	can	be	physical,	verbal,	or	mental.
Broadly	speaking,	non-virtuous	actions	are	categorised	into	the	following	ten
types:	killing,	stealing,	and	sexual	misconduct	(which	are	the	three	physical
actions);	lying,	divisive	speech,	harsh	speech,	and	meaningless	gossip	(which	are
the	four	verbal	actions);	and	covetousness,	harmful	intent,	and	distorted	views
(which	are	the	three	mental	actions).	An	act	is	considered	virtuous	if	it	either
passively	 refrains	 from	 the	 ten	 recognised	 types	 of	 non-virtuous	 action,	 or
actively	engages	in	acts	for	the	sake	of	others	with	an	altruistic	motivation.
	
Visionary	Appearances
	
snang-ba
According	to	the	terminology	of	the	
Great	Perfection
,	there	are	four	successive
visionary	 appearances	 experienced	 through	 the	 practice	 of	
All-surpassing
Realisation
	
(
thod-rgal
).	 These	 are:	 the	 visionary	 appearance	 of	 the	 direct
perception	 of	
reality
	 (
chos-nyid	 mngon-sum-gyi	 snang-ba
),	 the	 visionary
appearance	 of	 increasing	 contemplative	 experience	 (
nyams	 gong-’phel-ba’i
snang-ba
),	the	visionary	appearance	of	reaching	the	limit	of	
awareness
	(
rig-pa
tshad-phebs-kyi	snang-ba
),	and	the	visionary	appearance	of	the	cessation	of
clinging	to	reality	(
chos-nyid-du	’dzin-pa	zad-pa’i	snang-ba
).
	
Vital	Energy
	
rlung
,	Skt.	
vāyu
In	the	
tantras
	and	related	medical	traditions,	it	is	said	that	there	are	ten	kinds	of
vital	energy	or	subtle	winds	which	flow	through	the	72,000	
energy	channels
(Skt.	
nāḍ
ῑ
)	of	the	body.	These	sustain	life	and	include	the	energies	which	support
various	conceptual	states	within	the	individual’s	mind.	At	the	subtlest	level,
subtle	mind	and	vital	energy	are	thought	of	as	a	single	entity.	The	ten	kinds	of
vital	 energy	 comprise:	 five	 inner	 vital	 energies	 (
nang-gi	rlung	lnga
)	 which
influence	the	body’s	inner	motility,	and	five	outer	vital	energies	(
phyi-’i	rlung
lnga
)	which	have	specific	effects	on	the	outward	motility	of	the	body.	The
former	are	the	vital	energies	associated	with	the	
five	elements
	(earth,	water,	fire,
wind,	space)	and	their	respective	colour-tones	(yellow,	white,	red,	green,	blue).
The	latter	comprise	life-breath	(Skt.	
prāṇa
,	Tib.	
srog-’dzin
),	muscular	movement
(Skt.	
vyāna
),	digestion	(Skt.	
samāna
),	semiotic/vocal	movement	(Skt.	
udāna
),
and	reproduction/waste	disposal	(Skt.	
apāna
).	The	movement	of	vital	energy
through	the	
energy	channels
	of	the	
subtle	body
	is	refined	in	the	context	of	the

perfection	stage
	of	meditation.	Ordinarily,	in	the	case	of	individuals	who	have
not	cultivated	such	practices,	both	vital	energy	and	subtle	mind	are	diffused	via
the	right	and	left	
energy	channels
	and	thereby	come	to	permeate	the	entire
network	of	the	body’s	minor	channels.	This	dissipated	vital	energy	is	known	as
the	 vital	 energy	 of	 past	 actions	 (
las-kyi	 rlung
)	 because	 it	 is	 activated	 by
dissonant	 mental	 states
,	 and	 the	 influence	 of	
past	 actions
	 predominates,
obscuring	the	
inner	radiance
	of	the	subtle	mind.	However,	when	the	practices
of	the	
perfection	stage
	of	meditation	are	applied,	the	knots	which	block	their
combined	movement	through	the	
energy	centres
	(Skt.	
cakra
)	located	on	the
central	
energy	channel
	are	untied	and	both	vital	energy	and	subtle	mind	enter,
abide	and	dissolve	within	the	central	
energy	channel
	of	the	body	(Skt.	
avadhūti
)
and	then	the	non-conceptual	
inner	radiance
	arises,	for	which	reason	it	becomes
known	as	the	
vital	energy
	of	
pristine	cognition
	(
ye-shes-kyi	 rlung
).	 On	 a
physical	level,	it	is	important,	
according	to	the	Tibetan	medical	tradition,	that
vital	energy	remains	in	balance	with	bile	and	phlegm,	which	are	collectively
known	as	the	three	humours,	if	sound	health	is	to	be	maintained.
	
Vows	[of	Buddhism]
	
sdom-pa
,	Skt.	
saṃvara
Sets	of	precepts	or	injunctions	voluntarily	adopted	in	the	course	of	Buddhist
practice	which	facilitate	an	individual’s	progress	on	the	path	to	
enlightenment
.
These	include	short-term	vows,	such	as	the	one-day	vows,	lifelong	vows,	such	as
the	 monastic	 vows	 of	 a	 fully	 ordained	 monk	 or	 nun,	 and	 perpetual	 vows
associated	 with	 the	
Greater	 Vehicle
,	 which	 are	 to	 be	 maintained	 over	 a
succession	of	lifetimes.	All	such	vows	may	be	subsumed	within	three	categories:
the	monastic	vows	of	the	
prātimokṣa
,	the	special	vows	of	the	
bodhisattvas
,	and
the	 special	
commitments
	
(Skt.	
samaya
)	 undertaken	 by	 practitioners	 of	 the
tantras
.	 See	
Prātimokṣa
	 and	
Commitment
.	 The	 special	 vows	 of	 the
bodhisattvas
,	exemplified	by	the	
Sūtra	of	Ākāśagarbha
,	extol	that	
bodhisattvas
must	be	careful	to	maintain	their	altruistic	vows,	expressed	in	the	verses	of	the
four	immeasurable	aspirations
,	and	to	avoid	nineteen	specifically	enumerated
root	
downfalls
	(Skt.	
mūlāpatti
)	and	forty-six	
transgressions
	
(Skt.	
duṣkṛta
).	In
all	schools	of	Tibetan	Buddhism,	the	
prātimokṣa
	and	
bodhisattva
	vows	and	the
commitments
	of	the	
tantras
	are	fully	integrated.
	
Vows	of	the	Buddhist	Laity
	
dge-bsnyen-gyi	sdom-pa
See	under	
Prātimokṣa
.
	

Water	Libation
	
chu-gtor
A	specific	purificatory	offering	of	water,	the	rites	of	which	were	introduced	to
Tibet	from	India	by	
Atiśa
	during	the	eleventh	century.
	
Way	of	Secret	Mantras
	
gsang-sngags[kyi	theg-pa]
,	Skt.	
Guhyamantrayāna
The	‘way	of	
secret
	
mantras
’	is	a	synonym	for	the	
Vehicle	of	Indestructible
Reality
	
(Skt.	
Vajrayāna
).
	
Wind
	
rlung
,	Skt.	
vāyu
See	
Vital	Energy
.
	
World-system
	
’jig-rten-gyi	khams
,	Skt.	
lokadhātu
See	
Three	World-systems
.
	
Wrath
	
drag-po’i	las
,	Skt.	
maraṇakriyā
One	of	the	
four	aspects	of	enlightened	activity
.	The	concept	of	wrath	in	the
context	of	Buddhist	
tantra
	should	not	be	understood	in	terms	of	even	the	subtlest
egocentric	violence	or	fierceness.	Wrath	here	refers	to	the	natural	transformative
process	of	
buddha-mind
,	the	aggressive	
natural	transformation
	of	the	deep-
seated	conditioning	which	underlies	mundane	deluded	consciousness	and	the
concomitant	psycho-physical	
aggregates
,	
elemental	properties
,	 and	 sensory
and	mental	processes.	See	
Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened	Activity
	and	Appendix
Two.
	
Wrathful	Deities
	
khro-bo’i	lha-tshogs
See	Appendix	Two.
	
Yakṣa
	
gnod-sbyin
	
A	class	of	spirits	of	Indian	origin	who	assume	both	male
(
yakṣa
)	and	female	(
yakṣiṇ
ῑ
)	forms.	Frequently	depicted	as	holding	choppers,
cleavers,	and	swords,	they	are	said	to	inhabit	mountainous	areas	and	sylvan
groves,	 and	 if	 propitiated	 in	 the	 context	
of	 a	
means	 for	 attainment
	 (Skt.
sādhana
),	they	may	confer	the	common	
accomplishment
	
of	swift-footedness.
The	Tibetan	equivalent	
gnod-sbyin
	literally	means	‘granting	harm’,	emphasising
their	more	malign	attributes.
Yama
	
gshin-rje
See	under	
Yama	Dharmarāja
.

	
Yama	Dharmarāja
	
gshin-rje	chos-kyi	rgyal-po
The	embodiment	of	the	forces	of	
impermanence
	and	the	infallible	laws	of	
cause
and	effect
.	His	fierce	form	is	iconographically	depicted	holding	the	wheel	of
life’s	rebirth	processes	(
bhavacakra
,	Tib.	
srid-pa’i	’khor-lo
)	within	his	jaws,
indicating	 that	 the	 nature	 of	
cyclic	 existence
	 is	 in	 its	 entirety	 bound	 by
impermanence
	 and	 the	 laws	 of	
cause	 and	 effect
.	 In	 the	 context	 of	 the
intermediate	state	of	rebirth
	(
srid-pa’i	bar-do
)	he	personifies	the	process	of
confronting	in	death	the	nature	of	one’s	past	life’s	actions	and,	based	on	the
natural	laws	of	
cause	and	effect
,	he	personifies	the	process	of	‘judgement’	that
determines	the	consequential	outcome	of	such	
past	actions
.	See	Chapters	11	and
13	and	the	Introduction.	
Yama	Dharmarāja
	is	also	the	sixth	of	the	
six	sages
(
thub-pa	drug
),	who	form	one	subcategory	within	the	assembly	of	the	forty-two
peaceful	deities
.	See	Appendix	Two.
	
Yeshe	Tsogyal
	
ye-shes	mtsho-rgyal
Padmasambhava
’s	innermost	Tibetan	consort	who	became	accomplished	in	the
maṇḍala
	of	
Vajrak
ῑ
la
.	She	compiled	many	of	
Padmasambhava
’s	oral	teachings
and	concealed	them	throughout	Tibet	in	the	form	of	
treasures
	(
gter-ma
)	to	be
discovered	by	later	generations.
	
Yoga
	
rnal-’byor
The	Sanskrit	word	
yoga
,	literally	meaning	‘union’,	is	interpreted	in	Tibetan	to
mean	‘union	with	the	fundamental	nature	of	
reality
’.	In	Buddhism,	therefore,
yoga
	refers	to	the	methods	through	which	the	meditator	unites	with	the	qualities
of	the	
meditational	deity
	in	the	context	of	the	
generation	stage
,	and	the	nature
of	fundamental	
reality
	during	the	
perfection	stage
,	of	
meditation
.	In	terms	of
the	latter,	it	includes	mental	and	physical	practices,	which	refine	the	
energy
channels,
	and	mature	control	of	the	
vital	energies
	and	
seminal	points
	within
the	
subtle	body
.	These	practices	cultivate	
discriminative	awareness
,	and	the
coalescence	 of	
emptiness
	 respectively	 with	 the	
four	 delights
,	 with	
inner
radiance
,	and	with	non-conceptualisation.
	
Yogatantra
	
rnal-’byor-gi	rgyud
The	third	of	the	three	outer	classes	of	
tantra
,	which	form	one	subcategory	of	the
six	 classes	 of	
tantra
,	 and	 the	 sixth	 of	 the	
nine	vehicles
,	 according	 to	 the
Nyingma
	
school	of	Tibetan	Buddhism.	
Yogatantra
	emphasises	meditation,	rather

than	 external	 ritual,	 and	 here,	 the	 meditator	 progressively	 refines	 an
identification	with	the	
meditational	deity
.
	
Yogic	Exercises
	
khrul-’khor
,	Skt.	
yantra
A	series	of	vigorous	exercises,	including	yogic	jumps	(
’bebs
),	performed	in
conjunction	with	specific	visualisations	and	breathing	techniques,	which	enable
the	 meditator	 to	 develop	 the	 physical	 flexibility	 necessary	 for	 the	 subtle
meditative	practices	of	the	
perfection	stage
	of	
meditation
.
	
Yogic	Jumps
	
’bebs
See	under	
Yogic	Exercises
.
	
Yogin
	
rnal-’byor-pa
According	to	the	Tibetan	definition,	a	
yogin
	is	defined	as	‘one	who	seeks	to	unite
with	the	fundamental	nature	of	
reality
’.	In	other	words,	a	
yogin
	is	one	who
intensively	follows	the	spiritual	paths	outlined	in	the	
generation
	and	
perfection
stages
	of	
meditation
,	as	well	as	the	
Great	Perfection
.
	
Yoginī
	
rnal-’byor-ma
A	female	
yogin
.	In	the	context	of	the	present	work,	the	term	most	frequently
refers	to	the	twenty-eight	
Īśvar
ῑ
	who	form	one	subcategory	of	the	fifty-eight
wrathful	deities
.	See	Appendix	Two.

Thematic	Index	by	Chapter

Chapter	One
Natural	 Liberation	 of	 the	 Nature	 of	 Mind:	 The	 Four-session	 Yoga	 of	 the
Preliminary	Practice
COMMON	PRELIMINARY	PRACTICE
Meditation	on	the	Four	Themes	that	Turn	the	Mind	Toward	the	Search	for
Liberation
UNCOMMON	PRELIMINARY	PRACTICE
Refuge	
Outer	Refuge	Inner	Refuge	Secret	Refuge
Generation	of	an	Altruistic	Intention
Recitation	of	the	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	of	Vajrasattva
The	Maṇḍala	Offering
Prayer	to	the	Lineage	Teachers
Receiving	the	Four	Empowerments

Chapter	Two
A	Prayer	for	Union	with	the	Spiritual	Teacher,	[entitled]	Natural	Liberation,
Without	Renunciation	of	the	Three	Poisons
PRAYER	FOR	UNION
With	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality
With	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
With	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation
With	the	Three	Buddha-bodies	in	Union
ASPIRATIONAL	WISHES

Chapter	Three
Root	Verses	of	the	Six	Intermediate	States
Intermediate	State	of	Living
Intermediate	State	of	Dreams
Intermediate	State	of	Meditative	Concentration
Intermediate	State	of	the	Time	of	Death
Intermediate	State	of	Reality
Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth

Chapter	Four
The	Introduction	to	Awareness:	Natural	Liberation	through	Naked	Perception
THE	IMPORTANCE	OF	THE	INTRODUCTION	TO	AWARENESS
THE	ACTUAL	INTRODUCTION	TO	AWARENESS
Synonyms	for	Mind
The	Three	Considerations
CONSEQUENCES	OF	THE	
INTRODUCTION	TO	AWARENESS
OBSERVATIONS	RELATED	TO	EXAMINING	THE	NATURE	OF	MIND
INTRINSIC	 AWARENESS	 AS	 VIEW,	 MEDITATION,	 CONDUCT,	 AND
RESULT
Four	Great	Media
Four	Great	Nails
Unity	of	the	Three	Times
Exhaustion	of	the	Six	Extreme	Perspectives
SYNONYMS	FOR	AWARENESS
THE	NATURE	OF	APPEARANCES
CONCLUSION

Chapter	Five
The	Spiritual	Practice	entitled	Natural	Liberation	of	Habitual	Tendencies
THE	TEN-BRANCHED	PRAYER	FOR	THE	ACCUMULATION	OF	MERIT
Branch	of	Taking	Refuge
Branch	of	Invitation
Branch	of	Requesting	the	Deities	to	be	Seated
Branch	of	Paying	Homage
Branch	of	Making	Offerings
Branch	of	the	Confession	of	Negativity
Branch	of	Sympathetic	Rejoicing
Branch	of	Turning	the	Wheel	of	the	Sacred	Teachings
Branch	of	Requesting	the	Buddhas	Not	to	Enter	Nirvāṇa
Branch	of	the	Dedication	of	Merit	to	the	Unsurpassed	Greater	Vehicle
PURIFICATION
Visualisation	of	Vajrasattva
Recitation	of	the	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	of	Vajrasattva
MAIN	PRACTICE
Visualisation,	Prostration,	Offerings,	Refuge	and	Prayer	to	the	Peaceful	Deities
Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
Vairocana	and	Dhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
Vajrasattva	and	Buddhalocanā,	encircled	by	Kṣitigarbha,	Maitreya,	Lāsyā	and
Puṣpā
Ratnasambhava	 and	 Māmak
ῑ
,	 encircled	 by	 Samantabhadra,	 Ākāśagarbha,
Mālyā	and	Dhūpā
Amitābha	and	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
,	encircled	by	Avalokiteśvara,	Mañjuśr
ῑ
,	G
ῑ
tā	and
Ālokā
Amoghasiddhi	 and	 Samayatārā,	 encircled	 by	 Sarvanivāraṇaviśkambhin,
Vajrapāṇi,	Gandhā	and	Nart
ῑ
Eight	Male	and	Female	Gatekeepers
Six	Sages
Forty-two	Assembled	Peaceful	Deities
Visualisation,	Prostration,	Offerings,	Refuge	and	Prayer	to	the	Assembly	of
Awareness	Holders

Visualisation,	Prostration,	Offerings,	Refuge	and	Prayer	to	the	Twelve	Principal
Wrathful	Deities
Mahottara	Heruka	and	Krodheśvar
ῑ
Buddha	Heruka	and	Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ
Vajra	Heruka	and	Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ
Ratna	Heruka	and	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ
Padma	Heruka	and	Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ
Karma	Heruka	and	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ
Visualisation,	 Prostration,	 Offerings,	 Refuge	 and	 Prayer	 to	 the	 Peripheral
Wrathful	Deities
Eight	Mātaraḥ
	
Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
	Four	Female	Gatekeepers	Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
Prayer	to	the	Assembly	of	Sixty	Wrathful	Deities
Aspirational	Prayers	CONCLUSION

Chapter	Six
Natural	Liberation	of	Negativity	and	Obscuration	through	[Enactment	of]	the
Hundredfold	Homage	to	the	Sacred	Enlightened	Families
Homage	to	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
Homage	to	the	Five	Peaceful	Male	Buddhas
Homage	to	the	Five	Peaceful	Female	Buddhas
Homage	to	the	Eight	Male	Bodhisattvas
Homage	to	the	Eight	Female	Bodhisattvas
Homage	to	the	Four	Male	Gatekeepers
Homage	to	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers
Homage	to	the	Six	Sages
Homage	to	the	Six	Herukas
Homage	to	the	Six	Krodheśvar
ῑ
Homage	to	the	Eight	Mātaraḥ
Homage	to	the	Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
Homage	to	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers
Homage	to	the	Eight	Projectresses
Homage	to	the	Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ

Chapter	Seven
Natural	Liberation	through	Acts	of	Confession
PRELIMINARIES
Invitation	and	Request	for	the	Confessional	Field	to	be	Present
Homage	to	the	Three	Buddha-bodies,	which	Compose	the	Peaceful	and	Wrathful
Deities
Threefold	 Offering	 of	 Outer	 Phenomena,	 Inner	 Cloud-masses,	 and	 Secret
Substances
Secret	Offering	of	Supreme	Bliss
Affirmation	of	Vows	within	the	Modality	of	the	View
Call	to	the	Assembly	of	Peaceful	and	Wrathful	Deities	for	Attention
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	INEXPRESSIBLE	TRUTH
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	PEACEFUL	DEITIES
To	Samantabhadra	and	Samantabhadr
ῑ
To	the	Five	Male	Buddhas
To	the	Five	Female	Buddhas
To	the	Eight	Male	Bodhisattvas
To	the	Eight	Female	Bodhisattvas
To	the	Six	Sages
To	the	Four	Male	Gatekeepers
To	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers
To	the	Entire	Array	of	the	Peaceful	Deities
Further	Remorseful	Confession	to	the	Peaceful	Deities
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	WRATHFUL	DEITIES
Confession	of	Faults	in	Achieving	Meditative	Stability	in	Reality
Confession	of	Faults	in	Achieving	the	Meditative	Stability	which	Illuminates	All
That	Appears
Confession	of	Faults	in	Achieving	the	Meditative	Stability	of	the	Causal	Basis
Confession	to	the	Five	Herukas
To	the	Five	Krodheśvar
ῑ
To	the	Eight	Mātaraḥ
To	the	Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
To	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers

To	the	Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
To	the	Awareness	Holders
Confession	of	One’s	Beginningless	Violation	of	the	Commitments
Confession	 to	 the	 Entire	 Maṇḍala	 of	 Wrathful	 Deities	 and	 the	 Request	 for
Forgiveness
Specific	Confessional	Prayers	to	the	Maṇḍala	of	the	Wrathful	Deities
PLAINTIVE	CONFESSION	OF	RAMPANT	EGOHOOD
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	THE	VIEW
CONFESSION	IN	THE	PRESENCE	OF	ALL	THOSE	GONE	TO	BLISS
Confession	of	Degenerated	Commitments	and	Infractions
Recitation	of	the	Hundred-syllable	Mantra	of	Vajrasattva

Chapter	Eight
Natural	Liberation	through	Recognition	of	the	Visual	Indications	and	Signs	of
Death
INTRODUCTION
EXTERNAL	SIGNS	OF	DEATH156-9
INTERNAL	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
Examination	of	the	Vital	Breath
Examination	of	the	Signs	of	Death	which	Occur	in	Dreams
SECRET	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
SIGNS	OF	REMOTE	DEATH
Analysis	of	the	Reflected	Image	in	the	Sky
SIGNS	OF	NEAR	DEATH
MISCELLANEOUS	SIGNS	OF	DEATH
SIGNS	OF	EXTREMELY	NEAR	DEATH
Dissolution	of	the	Five	Sense	Faculties	and	the	Five	Elements
Movement	of	the	Generative	Essences
Dawning	of	Inner	Radiance
SIGNS	INDICATING	THE	PLACE	OF	SUBSEQUENT	REBIRTH
CONCLUSION

Chapter	Nine
Natural	Liberation	of	Fear	through	the	Ritual	Deception	of	Death
GENERAL	CONSOLIDATED	RITE	FOR	AVERTING	DEATH
SPECIFIC	RITES	FOR	AVERTING	DEATH
Ritual	Averting	of	the	Signs	of	Near	Death
Ritual	Averting	of	the	Signs	of	Remote	Death
Ritual	Averting	of	Further	Signs	of	Near	Death
CONCLUSION

Chapter	Ten
Consciousness	Transference:	Natural	Liberation	through	Recollection
INTRODUCTION
TRAINING	IN	CONSCIOUSNESS	TRANSFERENCE
ACTUAL	APPLICATION	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS	TRANSFERENCE	AT	THE
TIME	OF	DEATH
The	Timing	and	Context
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	
Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource
Consciousness	Transference	into	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation
Instantaneous	Consciousness	Transference
Consciousness	Transference	of	Ordinary	Beings
CONCLUSION

Chapter	Eleven
The	Great	Liberation	by	Hearing
PART	ONE:	AN	ELUCIDATION	OF	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	THE
TIME	 OF	 DEATH	 AND	 OF	 THE	 APPEARANCE	 OF	 THE	 PEACEFUL
DEITIES	IN	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REALITY
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION	TO	INNER	RADIANCE	IN	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE
OF	THE	TIME	OF	DEATH
Introduction	to	the	Inner	Radiance	of	the	Ground
Introduction	to	the	Inner	Radiance	of	the	Path
INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REALITY
Introduction	to	the	Arising	of	Sounds,	Lights	and	Rays
Appearance	of	the	Peaceful	Deities
White	Vairocana	and	Akāśadhātv
ῑ
śvar
ῑ
	appear	within	Blue	Luminosity
Blue	Akṣobhya-Vajrasattva	and	Buddhalocanā	appear	within	White	Luminosity,
Encircled	by	Four	Bodhisattvas	Kṣitigarbha,	Maitreya,	Lāsyā	and	Puṣpā
Yellow	 Ratnasambhava	 and	 Māmak
ῑ
	 appear	 within	 Yellow	 Luminosity,
Encircled	 by	 Four	 Bodhisattvas	 Ākāśagarbha,	 Samantabhadra,	 Mālyā	 and
Dhūpā
Red	Amitābha	and	Pāṇḍaravāsin
ῑ
	appear	within	Red	Luminosity,	Encircled	by
Four	Bodhisattvas	Avalokiteśvara,	Mañjuśr
ῑ
,	G
ῑ
tā	and	Ālokā
Green	 Amoghasiddhi	 and	 Samayatārā	 appear	 within	 Green	 Luminosity,
Encircled	by	Four	Bodhisattvas	Vajrapāṇi,	Nivāraṇaviṣkhambhin,	Gandhā	and
Nart
ῑ
Entire	Peaceful	Assembly	of	the	Five	Enlightened	Families	Appears	Together
with	the	Vision	of	the	Four	Pristine	Cognitions	Combined
Divine	 Assembly	 of	 Awareness	 Holders	 and	 Ḍākin
ῑ
s	 appears	 within	 Five-
coloured	Luminosity
PART	 TWO:	 AN	 ELUCIDATION	 OF	 THE	 APPEARANCE	 OF	 THE
WRATHFUL	DEITIES	IN	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REALITY
Introduction
Arising	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	the	Wrathful	Deities
Buddha	Heruka	and	Buddhakrodheśvar
ῑ

Vajra	Heruka	and	Vajrakrodheśvar
ῑ
Ratna	Heruka	and	Ratnakrodheśvar
ῑ
Padma	Heruka	and	Padmakrodheśvar
ῑ
Karma	Heruka	and	Karmakrodheśvar
ῑ
The	Eight	Gaur
ῑ
,	the	Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
,	the	Four	Female	Gatekeepers,	and	the
Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
Consequences	of	Recognition	and	Lack	of	Recognition	
Aspirational	Prayers
CONCLUSION	OF	THE	INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE
OF	THE	TIME	OF	DEATHAND	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REALITY
PART	THREE:	AN	ELUCIDATION	OF	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF
REBIRTH
INTRODUCTION	TO	THE	MENTAL	BODY
Characteristics	of	the	Mental	Body
Characteristics	of	the	Intermediate	State	of	Rebirth
The	Meeting	with	Yama	Dharmarāja,	Embodiment	of	the	Infallible	Laws	of
Cause	and	Effect
The	Power	of	Perceptions
Prayer	to	Mahākaruņika
OBSTRUCTION	OF	THE	WOMB	ENTRANCES
CHOOSING	A	WOMB	ENTRANCE
Transferring	the	Consciousness	to	Pure	Buddha	Fields
Choosing	a	Womb	Entrance	within	Impure	Cyclic	Existence
CONCLUSION

Chapter	Twelve
Aspirational	Prayers
Aspirational	Prayer	Calling	to	the	Buddhas	and	Bodhisattvas	for	Assistance
Aspirational	 Prayer	 which	 Rescues	 from	 the	 Dangerous	 Pathways	 of	 the
Intermediate	States
Aspirational	Prayer	which	Protects	from	Fear	of	the	Intermediate	States

Chapter	Thirteen
A	Masked	Drama	of	Rebirth
PART	ONE:	
NATURAL	LIBERATION	OF	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF
REBIRTH:	 ATEACHING	 REVEALING	 THE	 NATURAL	 EXPRESSION	 OF
VIRTUE	AND	NEGATIVITY	IN	THE	INTERMEDIATE	STATE	OF	REBIRTH
THE	SCENE
Act	 One:	 The	 Meeting	 of	 the	 Wrongdoing	 One	 Lakṣanāraka	 with	 Yama
Dharmarāja
Act	 Two:	 The	 Meeting	 of	 the	 Virtuous	 Householder	 Śr
ῑ
jāta	 with	 Yama
Dharmarāja
PART	TWO:	SUPPLEMENT	TO	
A	TEACHING	REVEALING	THE	NATURAL
EXPRESSION	 OF	 VIRTUE	 AND	 NEGATIVITY	 IN	 THE	 INTERMEDIATE
STATE	OF	REBIRTH
,	ENTITLED	
GONG	OF	DIVINE	MELODY
THE	SCENE
Act	One:	Exhortation	by	the	Deity	of	Good	Conscience	following	the	Entry	into
the	Hells	of	the	Wrongdoing	One	Lakṣanāraka
Act	Two:	Celebratory	Speech	by	the	Deity	of	Good	Conscience	as	the	Virtuous
Householder	Śr
ῑ
jāta	sets	off	for	the	Realms	of	Higher	Rebirth

Chapter	Fourteen
Liberation	by	Wearing:	Natural	Liberation	of	the	Psycho-physical	Aggregates
INTRODUCTION
PART	ONE
Twenty-six	Line	Supreme	Essential	Mantra	of	Samantabhadra
Twenty-nine	Line	Supreme	Essential	Mantra	of	Samantabhadr
ῑ
Twenty-five	Mantras	which	Reverse	Attachment
PART	 TWO:	 SEED-SYLLABLES	 AND	 MANTRAS	 OF	 THE	 PEACEFUL
AND	WRATHFUL	DEITIES
Forty-two	Peaceful	Deities
Five	Male	and	Five	Female	Buddhas
Eight	Male	Bodhisattvas
Eight	Female	Bodhisattvas
Six	Sages
Eight	Male	and	Female	Gatekeepers
Sixty	Wrathful	Deities
Twelve	Principal	Herukas	and	Krodheśvar
ῑ
Eight	Mātaraḥ
Eight	Piśāc
ῑ
Four	Female	Gatekeepers
Twenty-eight	Īśvar
ῑ
Four	Great	Wrathful	Male	Gatekeepers
PART	THREE
Six	Syllables	of	the	Six	Classes	of	Sentient	Beings
Hundred-syllable	Mantra	of	Vajrasattva
Syllables	of	the	Sixteen	Vowels	and	Thirty-four	Consonants
Heart	Mantra	of	Dependent	Origination
Mantras	of	the	Four	Aspects	of	Enlightened	Activity
CONCLUSION

FOR	THE	BEST	IN	PAPERBACKS,	LOOK	FOR	THE
In	every	corner	of	the	world,	on	every	subject	under	the	sun,	Penguin	represents
quality	and	variety	—	the	very	best	in	publishing	today.
For	complete	information	about	books	available	from	Penguin	—	including
Penguin	Classics,	Penguin	Compass,	and	Puffins	—	and	how	to	order	them,
write	to	us	at	the	appropriate	address	below.	Please	note	that	for	copyright
reasons	the	selection	of	books	varies	from	country	to	country.
	
	
In	the	United	States:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Group	(USA),	P.O.	Box	12289
Dept.	B,	Newark,	New	Jersey	07101-5289
	or	call	1-800-788-6262.
In	the	United	Kingdom:
	Please	write	to	
Dept.	EP,	Penguin	Books	Ltd,	Bath
Road,	Harmondsworth,	West	Drayton,	Middlesex	UB7	0DA.
In	Canada:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	Canada	Ltd,	90	Eglinton	Avenue
East,	Suite	700,	Toronto,	Ontario	M4P	2Y3.
In	Australia:
	 Please	 write	 to	
Penguin	 Books	 Australia	 Ltd,	 P.O.	 Box	 257,
Ringwood,	Victoria	3134.
In	New	Zealand:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	(NZ)	Ltd,	Private	Bag	102902,
North	Shore	Mail	Centre,	Auckland	10.
In	India:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	India	Pvt	Ltd,	11	Panchsheel	Shopping
Centre,	Panchsheel	Park,	New	Delhi	110	017.
In	the	Netherlands:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	Netherlands	bv,	Postbus
3507,	NL-1001	AH	Amsterdam.
In	 Germany:
	 Please	 write	 to	
Penguin	 Books	 Deutschland	 GmbH,
Metzlerstrasse	26,	60594	Frankfurt	am	Main.
In	Spain:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	S.	A.,	Bravo	Murillo	19,	1º	B,	28015
Madrid.
In	Italy:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Italia	s.r.l.,	Via	Benedetto	Croce	2,	20094

Corsico,	Milano.
In	France:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	France,	Le	Carré	Wilson,	62	rue	Benjamin
Baillaud,	31500	Toulouse.
In	Japan:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	Japan	Ltd,	Kaneko	Building,	2-3-25
Koraku,	Bunkyo-Ku,	Tokyo	112.
In	South	Africa:
	Please	write	to	
Penguin	Books	South	Africa	(Pty)	Ltd,	Private
Bag	X14,	Parkview,	2122	Johannesburg.

a
See	the	glossary	for	a	description	of	the	five	psycho-physical	aggregates	and
other	Buddhist	terms	used	in	the	commentary.	
Ed
.
b
The	perspective	of	the	
Tibetan	Book	of	the	Dead
	is	that	of	Highest	Yoga	Tantra.
Ed
.
c
These	relationships	are	vividly	expressed	in	Chapter	11	of	our	text,	‘The	Great
Liberation	by	Hearing’,	where	specific	instructions	are	given	for	recognising	the
spiritual	opportunities	that	occur	at	the	moment	of	death,	that	occur	during	the
intermediate	 state	 of	 reality,	 and	 that	 occur	 as	 the	 processes	 of	 rebirth	 are
experienced.	Here	the	instructions	speak	of	a	recognition	which	assimilates	the
moment	of	death	with	the	Buddha-body	of	Reality,	the	intermediate	state	of
reality	with	the	Buddha-body	of	Perfect	Resource	and	the	intermediate	state	of
rebirth	with	the	Buddha-body	of	Emanation.	
Ed
.
d
In	our	text	these	processes	are	described	in	Chapter	8.	
Ed
.
e
The	 teachings	 presented	 in	 our	 text	 are	 based	 on	 the	 Great	 Perfection
(Dzogchen)	view.	
Ed
.
f
‘Cutting	through	Resistance’	and	the	direct	introduction	to	awareness	are	the
subject	 matter	 of	 Chapter	 4	 of	 the	 present	 work.	 The	 introduction	 to	 the
intermediate	state	of	reality,	in	Chapter	11	of	our	text,	is	illustrative	of	the
esoteric	instructions	on	‘All-surpassing	Realisation’,	which	is	the	pinnacle	of
meditative	practice	according	to	the	Nyingma	school.	
Ed
.
g
The	symbolism	of	each	of	the	meditational	deities	associated	with	our	text	is
described	in	Chapters	5,	6,	11	and	14	and	in	Appendix	Two.	
Ed
.
h
For	a	detailed	description	of	the	processes	of	death,	see	also	HH	Dalai	Lama,
Advice	on	Dying
.
i
For	a	selection	of	finely	translated	
Vajrayāna
	protective	rituals,	see	Stephen
Beyer,	
The	Cult	of	Tārā
.